Media

/wiki/Doomsday_(Doctor_Who)
"Doomsday" (Doctor Who)
177b – "Doomsday" Doctor Who episode The Daleks, the Cybermen and Torchwood battle in Canary Wharf , in the first Dalek–Cyberman encounter and conflict forty-three years after the show's premiere. Cast Doctor David Tennant ( Tenth Doctor ) Companion Billie Piper ( Rose Tyler ) Others Camille Coduri – Jackie Tyler Noel Clarke – Mickey Smith Shaun Dingwall – Pete Tyler Andrew Hayden-Smith – Jake Simmonds Tracy-Ann Oberman – Yvonne Hartman Raji James – Dr. Rajesh Singh Paul Kasey – Cyber Leader Nicholas Briggs – Dalek and Cyberman voices Catherine Tate – The Bride Production Writer Russell T Davies Director Graeme Harper Script editor Helen Raynor Producer Phil Collinson Executive producer(s) Russell T Davies Julie Gardner Incidental music composer Murray Gold Series Series 2 Length 2nd of 2-part story, 45 minutes Originally broadcast 8 July 2006 Chronology ← Preceded by Followed by → " Army of Ghosts " " The Runaway Bride " " Doomsday " is the thirteenth and final episode in the second series of the revival of the British science fiction television programme Doctor Who . It was first broadcast on 8 July 2006 and is the conclusion of a two-part story; the first part, " Army of Ghosts ", was broadcast on 1 July 2006. The two-part story features the Daleks , presumed extinct after the events of the 2005 series' finale , and the Cybermen , who appeared in a parallel universe in " Rise of the Cybermen " and " The Age of Steel ". Both species unexpectedly arrive on Earth at the conclusion of "Army of Ghosts". The concept of the Daleks and the Cybermen both appearing on-screen was first proposed in 1967, but was vetoed by Terry Nation , the creator of the Daleks. The episode is the first conflict between the two species in Doctor Who ' s 45-year history, and features Billie Piper 's last appearance in the lead companion role as Rose Tyler ; the final regular appearance of Noel Clarke as Rose's ex-boyfriend and previous companion Mickey Smith ; and the final regular appearances of Camille Coduri and Shaun Dingwall as Rose's parents, Jackie and Pete Tyler . The episode was filmed in December 2005 and January 2006, alongside the episodes "Rise of the Cybermen" and "The Age of Steel". The plot consists mostly of the Daleks and Cybermen waging a global war, with humanity caught in the crossfire. The Doctor , the Tyler family, and Mickey Smith fight for their lives trying to reverse the situation. They are successful, but at an emotional cost to the Doctor and Rose, as they are left in separate universes. The episode is one of the most popular Doctor Who episodes since the show's revival. It was nominated, along with "Army of Ghosts", for the 2007 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation, Short Form ; the award was won by the fourth episode in the series, " The Girl in the Fireplace ". It shared the revived series' highest Audience Appreciation rating of 89 with " The Parting of the Ways ", " Silence in the Library ", and " Forest of the Dead " until 28 June 2008—" The Stolen Earth " gained an AI rating of 91 [ 1 ] —and is favoured by most critics for both the Dalek-Cyberman conflict and the farewell scene between the Doctor and Rose. Contents 1 Plot 2 Production 2.1 Conception 2.2 Filming 2.3 Music 3 Broadcast, reception, and legacy 3.1 Broadcast and pre-airing media blackout 3.2 Critical reception and later release 4 References 5 External links Plot [ edit ] Continuing the events of " Army of Ghosts ", the episode opens with Dr. Singh, Mickey, and Rose trapped in a sealed room within Torchwood . Four Daleks, accompanied by a device known as the " Genesis Ark ", have emerged from the Void ship . A black Dalek called Dalek Sec extracts information about Earth from Dr. Singh, killing him in the process. Dalek Sec discovers that a separate invasion is in progress, and sends Dalek Thay to investigate. The Cybermen who took control of Torchwood detect the Dalek technology and confront them, offering an alliance. The Daleks decline and kill two Cybermen, causing the Cyber Leader to declare war on the Daleks. Ms. Hartman and Jackie are taken by the Cybermen for conversion, but the Cyber Leader orders the Doctor held aside because he has valuable information about the Daleks. Ms. Hartman is converted, but before Jackie can be converted the Cyber Leader is destroyed by a strike team led by Jake Simmonds, who have travelled from their universe in pursuit of the Cybermen. Jackie escapes into a stairwell, and Jake uses a device around his neck to take the Doctor to the parallel universe and their version of Torchwood. The Doctor meets with the alternate universe Pete Tyler, who tells him that after he left the Cybermen were sealed in their factories while humanity decided what to do with them. In the meantime, the Cybermen vanished and the breach began causing unprecedented global warming on the parallel Earth, which the Doctor theorises is the start of the process that will lead to both planets falling into the Void. Pete demands the Doctor seal the breach before his Earth is destroyed. Meanwhile, Rose deduces that she and Mickey were kept alive because their touch can activate the Genesis Ark. Dalek Sec explains that they cannot open the Ark because it is stolen Time Lord technology. He demands that Rose open it, but she refuses and mocks the Daleks until the Doctor arrives. The Doctor realises that these Daleks are the enigmatic Cult of Skaro , and uses his sonic screwdriver to allow the Cybermen into the sphere chamber. As the Cybermen attack the Daleks, Mickey accidentally activates the Ark while escaping. The Daleks kill the Cybermen and take the Ark outside to release its contents. The Ark opens and millions of Daleks that were imprisoned during the Time War pour out and begin engaging the Cybermen firing on them from below, though humanity is caught in the crossfire and many are killed while running for cover. The Doctor and his companions flee into the tower. Along the way, the alternate universe Pete finds and saves Jackie. The Doctor brings everyone to the control room where he explains that crossing the Void causes a traveller to become saturated in Void material. If he opens the breach and reverses it, anything saturated in Void material will be pulled in. Everyone except Jackie has crossed the breach and is vulnerable to being trapped in the Void, so the Doctor sends them all to the parallel universe. Rose decides she would rather be with the Doctor than her family and jumps back to help him. The Cybermen attempt to stop the Doctor but are repelled by a converted Ms. Hartman, who has resisted the effects of her conversion and at least partially retains her personality. The Doctor and Rose open the breach and hold on to magnetic clamps as the Cybermen and Daleks are pulled in. The Cult of Skaro use an emergency temporal shift to escape. Rose's lever slips, and in resetting it she loses her grip and plunges toward the Void. At the last second, Pete reappears and grabs her, and together they transport back to the parallel universe. The breach closes, leaving a devastated Rose trapped in the parallel universe. The Doctor presses his ear against the wall, as a tearful Rose does the same in the other universe, as if trying to listen for each other. Some time later, Rose has a dream where she hears the Doctor's voice calling her. The Tylers follow the voice to a remote bay in Norway called Bad Wolf Bay , where a holographic image of the Doctor appears. He tells Rose he is using the energy of a supernova to transmit to her via one last small breach between universes. Rose breaks down in tears and tells the Doctor that she loves him, but before the Doctor can reply, the breach seals and the Doctor's image disappears. In the TARDIS, tears run down the Doctor's cheeks as he slowly regains his composure and sets a course. As he gets back to piloting the TARDIS, he looks up to see a woman in a wedding dress standing in the TARDIS console room. With the Doctor shocked and confused, the bride angrily demands to know where she is, leading to the events of " The Runaway Bride ". Production [ edit ] Conception [ edit ] The concept of the Daleks and Cybermen appearing together on screen is not new; in December 1967, the BBC approached Terry Nation to have both races in a serial, but Nation vetoed this idea. The concept came to Davies while mapping out the 2006 series: the story would both serve to resurrect the popular Daleks and provide a suitable exit for Piper, who had decided to leave Doctor Who . [ 2 ] "Doomsday" is the first episode in the history of Doctor Who where the Cybermen and the Daleks appear on-screen together; Cybermen and Daleks were both featured in The Five Doctors and " Army of Ghosts ", but in separate scenes. [ 3 ] [ 4 ] The two-part finale was originally going to take place in Cardiff on the time rift , which was the focus of the episodes " The Unquiet Dead " and " Boom Town ". When Torchwood was commissioned in 2005, Davies decided to base the spin-off in Cardiff and relocate "Army of Ghosts" and "Doomsday" to Canary Wharf in London. [ 2 ] An item of discussion between the production staff was over who would rescue Rose; Davies and Julie Gardner wanted Pete to rescue her, while Clarke and Phil Collinson wanted Mickey. The role was ultimately given to Pete, to emphasise that he had accepted Rose as a surrogate daughter. [ 2 ] The Doctor's intended reply to Rose was also discussed; Davies, who left the reply unspecified, stated he didn't know when asked by Collinson on the episode's commentary track , and Gardner vehemently believed the Doctor would reciprocate Rose's love. [ 5 ] Some elements of the story were inspired by Philip Pullman 's His Dark Materials trilogy. Pullman was "flattered" by the references in the episode, and compared Davies' actions to his own practice of referencing works. [ 6 ] Filming [ edit ] Southerndown beach in Wales was used as the backdrop to the Doctor's farewell to Rose Tyler on Bad Wolf Bay. To ensure that Clarke and Dingwall were available for filming, the story was filmed in the season's third production block with " Rise of the Cybermen " and " The Age of Steel ". Filming for the story started on 2 November 2005 on location in Kennington , London, but did not become the primary focus of the production crew until 29 November, when filming began on the scenes in and around the sphere chamber. The scene of the Tylers driving through Norway was filmed at Bridgend on 6 December. Scenes in the lever room, the main setting for the story, were filmed on 12–15 December 2005 and 3–5 January 2006. Greenscreen work for Rose being sucked into the void took place on 13 January, and the skirmish between the military and Cybermen on the bridge was filmed on 15 January. [ 2 ] Other location shooting took place at the Coal Exchange and Mount Stuart Square, Cardiff Bay . [ 7 ] The penultimate scene of the episode, the Doctor's farewell to Rose, was filmed on 16 January 2006; it was the last day of filming for Clarke and Dingwall. As with all scenes set at Bad Wolf Bay, these were in fact filmed at Southerndown beach in the Vale of Glamorgan . [ 8 ] Piper's last scene was Rose's reunion with the Doctor in " The Satan Pit " on 31 March, [ 9 ] but the shoot was rather emotional, [ 5 ] to the point there were several tears on set. [ 10 ] The last scene of "Doomsday", Catherine Tate's appearance in the TARDIS as Donna Noble (credited as "The Bride"), was filmed on 31 March during the wrap party . To ensure the secrecy of Rose's departure and Tate's appearance, only Piper and Tennant were given scripts of the departure scene, and director Graeme Harper was not informed of the final scene until the last possible second. [ 2 ] Music [ edit ] "Doomsday" Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player. You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser. The beginning of the song "Doomsday". Problems playing this file? See media help . As well as using existing music, such as the themes for the Daleks, Cybermen, and Rose, Murray Gold specially composed a piece of music for Rose's farewell entitled "Doomsday", which featured vocal work from Melanie Pappenheim . Instead of using the swelling violins that Davies and the rest of the production team had expected, Gold took a minimalist approach. When pitching the track to the production team, Gold described the track as representing Rose's unbridled energy and determination as she searches for the Doctor. He later said, "I wanted to get that kind of throbbing, sort of hurt sound of quite emotional rock, because I thought that's what Rose would do if she was hurting and ran up to her bedroom and locked herself in her room and had a good old cry, really." [ 11 ] The piece uses the same vocal work from " Rose ", when Rose first enters the TARDIS, thus creating a bookend effect . [ 11 ] It is a favourite among fans and of executive producer Julie Gardner, [ 5 ] and is one of the reasons, along with Pappenheim's overall contribution and the "Song for Ten" from " The Christmas Invasion ", that the soundtrack of both series was released several months later. [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Broadcast, reception, and legacy [ edit ] Broadcast and pre-airing media blackout [ edit ] To protect as much information concerning the episode as possible, the final scene of "Army of Ghosts" was withheld. The BBC website's Fear Forecasters, a panel who rate the episodes, were not allowed to see "Doomsday" before its airing, [ 14 ] and access to copies was restricted; the website thus does not have a Fear Forecast for the episode. [ 15 ] Despite this, the Dalek Sec prop, which had been previously unused in the series, had invaded the stage at the 2006 BAFTA Television Awards while the production team were collecting an award. [ 5 ] A similar moratorium would be placed on the following series' finale, " Last of the Time Lords ". [ 16 ] The episode's finalised average viewing figure was 8.22 million viewers and was, excepting World Cup games, the second most-watched television programme of the week, behind an episode of Coronation Street , and eighth most-watched overall. The companion episode of Doctor Who Confidential gained just over one million viewers, making it the second most watched programme on a non-terrestrial channel that week. [ 17 ] The ratings for the episode were higher than the following World Cup match between Germany and Portugal , which had a million fewer viewers. [ 18 ] Critical reception and later release [ edit ] "Doomsday" is one of the most popular episodes of the revived Doctor Who . It gained an audience Appreciation Index (AI) of 89, which was the highest figure for nearly two years—it was later surpassed by " The Stolen Earth ", which had an AI of 91 [ 1 ] [ 19 ] —and is the first episode of Doctor Who to receive a perfect 10 rating on IGN , [ 20 ] who congratulated Davies on making an action-packed episode so emotional. [ 21 ] Television Without Pity gave the episode an A+ rating. [ 22 ] The Stage commented that the Dalek-Cybermen conflict was the "only thing worth watching" at the weekend, overshadowing even the World Cup Final , and that the parting scene was "beautifully written and movingly played," with "not a dry eye in the universe". [ 23 ] Dek Hogan of Digital Spy stated that the episode was "beautifully balanced and with moments of high excitement and touching poignancy" and that the single oil tear shed by the Cyberman version of Hartman was a "nice touch". He criticised Catherine Tate's appearance as being unnecessary to end the episode and for "breaking the mood". [ 24 ] Stephen Brook of The Guardian thought that the episode was "a highpoint of the modern series, highly emotional, scary and genuinely exciting", while Rose's departure was "brilliantly handled". He positively compared the episode's plot of a war between "the greatest monsters in the programme history" against the film Alien vs. Predator . [ 25 ] After its initial airing, the episode was released on DVD, with " Fear Her " and " Army of Ghosts ", on 25 September 2006. [ 26 ] It was first aired on CBC Television on 19 February 2007. [ 27 ] The story ("Army of Ghosts" and "Doomsday") was one of three from the second series of Doctor Who to be nominated for the 2007 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation, Short Form ; the other stories nominated were " School Reunion " and " The Girl in the Fireplace ", [ 28 ] the award was won by the latter. [ 29 ] In a poll by SFX , 90,000 readers voted the farewell scene between the Doctor and Rose at Bad Wolf Bay as the greatest Sci-fi moment ever. [ 30 ] [ 31 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Hilton, Matt (30 June 2008). "The Stolen Earth – AI and Digital Ratings" . Doctor Who News Page . Retrieved 30 June 2008 . ^ a b c d e Sullivan, Shannon (15 November 2006). " " Army of Ghosts"/"Doomsday " " . A Brief History of Time (Travel) . Retrieved 30 October 2007 . ^ Terrance Dicks (writer), Peter Moffatt , John Nathan-Turner (uncredited) (directors), John Nathan-Turner (producer) (23 November 1983). The Five Doctors . Doctor Who . BBC . BBC1 . ^ Russell T Davies (writer), Graeme Harper (director), Phil Collinson (producer) (1 July 2006). " Army of Ghosts ". Doctor Who . Series 2. Episode 12. BBC . BBC One . ^ a b c d Russell T Davies , Julie Gardner , Phil Collinson . Commentary for "Doomsday" . BBC . Archived from the original (mp3) on 20 January 2007 . Retrieved 30 October 2007 . ^ "Would Pullman write for Dr Who?" . Newsround . 7 December 2007 . Retrieved 9 December 2007 . ^ "Walesarts, Coal Exchange and Mount Stuart Square, Cardiff Bay" . BBC . Retrieved 30 May 2010 . ^ "Walesarts, Southerndown beach, Vale of Glamorgan" . BBC . Retrieved 30 May 2010 . ^ Sullivan, Shannon. " " The Impossible Planet"/"The Satan Pit " " . A Brief History of Time (Travel) . Retrieved 30 October 2007 . ^ "Episode 13: Finale" (Embedded Flash object ) . Doctor Who Confidential . BBC . Retrieved 29 October 2007 . ^ a b "Music and Monsters". Doctor Who Confidential . 25 December 2006. BBC . BBC One . ^ "Who soundtrack soon" . BBC. 17 July 2006. Archived from the original on 17 March 2008 . Retrieved 6 July 2011 . ^ "Soundtrack details" . BBC. 6 November 2006. Archived from the original on 6 November 2006 . Retrieved 6 July 2011 . ^ "Fear Forecast: "Army of Ghosts " " . BBC Doctor Who website . BBC . Retrieved 25 February 2007 . ^ "Fear Forecast" . BBC . Retrieved 5 July 2011 . ^ "What did Lizo think of Doctor Who?" . CBBC . 18 June 2007 . Retrieved 21 June 2007 . ^ Lyon, Shaun (20 July 2006). "Doomsday Final Ratings, and Series Two Recap" . Doctor Who News Page . Archived from the original on 16 February 2009. ^ Hoskyn, Jane. "World Cup streaming fails to score" . The Register ; TV Scoop. ^ Hilton, Matt (2 April 2007). "Smith and Jones AI figure" . Doctor Who News Page . Retrieved 24 January 2008 . ^ "Television reviews; Score: 10" . IGN. 22 December 2006 . Retrieved 2 November 2007 . ^ Haque, Ahsan (22 December 2006). "Doomsday review" . IGN . Retrieved 2 November 2007 . ^ Clifton, Jacob (31 December 2006). "Hold the Line With Me: Doomsday recap" . Doctor Who reviews . Television Without Pity . Retrieved 2 November 2007 . ^ Venning, Harry (17 July 2006). "TV review" . The Stage . Archived from the original on 20 February 2012 . Retrieved 22 December 2007 . ^ Hogan, Dek (9 July 2006). "Horses for Courses" . Dek's TV Diary . Digital Spy . Retrieved 22 December 2007 . ^ Brook, Stephen (10 July 2006). "Doctor Who: that was the year that was" . Organgrinder . The Guardian . Retrieved 25 January 2008 . ^ "Doctor Who: Series 2 Volume 5" . BBC Shop . BBC . Retrieved 7 January 2008 . ^ "Vol 10, No 6" . This Week in Doctor Who . Doctor Who News Page ; Internet Archive . Archived from the original on 7 February 2007 . Retrieved 7 January 2008 . ^ "Nippon 2007 Hugo Nominees" . World Science Fiction Society . Retrieved 29 March 2007 . ^ "2007 Hugo Awards" . thehugoawards.org . World Science Fiction Society. 1 September 2007 . Retrieved 1 September 2007 . ^ Susanna Lazarus (25 June 2014). "David Tennant and Billie Piper's Doctor Who goodbye voted greatest sci-fi scene ever" . Radio Times . Retrieved 28 June 2014 . ^ "Doctor Who 'Doomsday' Scene With David Tennant, Billie Piper Voted SFX's Greatest Sci-Fi Scene Ever - Who Else Triumphed?" . The Huffington Post . 25 June 2014 . Retrieved 28 June 2014 . External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to: "Doomsday" Doomsday on TARDIS Data Core,  an external wiki TARDISODE 13 Episode trailer shown at the end of "Army of Ghosts" Episode commentary by Russell T Davies, Julie Gardner and Phil Collinson (MP3) "Doomsday" episode homepage "Doomsday" at the BBC Doctor Who homepage "Army of Ghosts" / "Doomsday" at Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel) "Army of Ghosts" / "Doomsday" at the Doctor Who Reference Guide "Doomsday" at Outpost Gallifrey "Doomsday" at TV.com "Doomsday" at the Internet Movie Database Reviews "Doomsday" reviews at Outpost Gallifrey "Army of Ghosts" / "Doomsday" reviews at Outpost Gallifrey "Doomsday" reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide "Army of Ghosts" / "Doomsday" reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide v t e Doctor Who episodes Classic series (1963–89): 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 Dimensions in Time (1993) Doctor Who (1996) The Curse of Fatal Death (1999) Scream of the Shalka (2003) Revived series (2005–present): 1 2 3 4 2008–10 specials 5 6 7 2013 specials 8 9 10 Christmas special " The Christmas Invasion " Series 2 " New Earth " " Tooth and Claw " " School Reunion " " The Girl in the Fireplace " " Rise of the Cybermen " / " The Age of Steel " " The Idiot's Lantern " " The Impossible Planet " / " The Satan Pit " " Love & Monsters " " Fear Her " " Army of Ghosts " / " Doomsday " Mini-episodes " Doctor Who: Children in Need " " Attack of the Graske " Tardisodes v t e Doctor Who episodes by Russell T Davies Ninth Doctor Series 1 " Rose " " The End of the World " " Aliens of London " / " World War Three " " The Long Game " " Boom Town " " Bad Wolf " / " The Parting of the Ways " Tenth Doctor Series 2 " The Christmas Invasion " " New Earth " " Tooth and Claw " " Love & Monsters " " Army of Ghosts " / " Doomsday " Series 3 " The Runaway Bride " " Smith and Jones " " Gridlock " " Utopia " / " The Sound of Drums " / " Last of the Time Lords " Series 4 " Voyage of the Damned " " Partners in Crime " " Midnight " " Turn Left " " The Stolen Earth " / " Journey's End " 2008–10 specials " The Next Doctor " " Planet of the Dead " " The Waters of Mars " The End of Time Mini episodes " Doctor Who: Children in Need " " Music of the Spheres " See also Death of the Doctor Novel Damaged Goods v t e Doctor Who : Cybermen stories First Doctor The Tenth Planet Second Doctor The Moonbase The Tomb of the Cybermen The Wheel in Space The Invasion Fourth Doctor Revenge of the Cybermen Fifth Doctor Earthshock The Five Doctors Sixth Doctor Attack of the Cybermen Seventh Doctor Silver Nemesis Tenth Doctor " Rise of the Cybermen " / " The Age of Steel " " Army of Ghosts " / " Doomsday " " The Next Doctor " Eleventh Doctor " The Pandorica Opens " " Closing Time " " Nightmare in Silver " " The Time of the Doctor " Twelfth Doctor " Dark Water " / " Death in Heaven " Torchwood " Cyberwoman " Minor appearances The War Games The Mind of Evil Carnival of Monsters Logopolis Mawdryn Undead " Dalek " " Human Nature " " A Good Man Goes to War " " The Day of the Doctor " " Face the Raven " " Hell Bent " v t e Doctor Who : Dalek television and film stories First Doctor The Daleks The Dalek Invasion of Earth The Chase " Mission to the Unknown " The Daleks' Master Plan Second Doctor The Power of the Daleks The Evil of the Daleks Third Doctor Day of the Daleks Planet of the Daleks Death to the Daleks Fourth Doctor Genesis of the Daleks Destiny of the Daleks Fifth Doctor Resurrection of the Daleks Sixth Doctor Revelation of the Daleks Seventh Doctor Remembrance of the Daleks Ninth Doctor " Dalek " " Bad Wolf " / " The Parting of the Ways " Tenth Doctor " Army of Ghosts " / " Doomsday " " Daleks in Manhattan " / " Evolution of the Daleks " " The Stolen Earth " / " Journey's End " Eleventh Doctor " Victory of the Daleks " " The Pandorica Opens " / " The Big Bang " " Asylum of the Daleks " " The Day of the Doctor " " The Time of the Doctor " Twelfth Doctor " Into the Dalek " " The Magician's Apprentice " / " The Witch's Familiar " Minor appearances The Space Museum The Wheel in Space The War Games The Mind of Evil Frontier in Space Logopolis Mawdryn Undead The Five Doctors Doctor Who " Human Nature " " The Waters of Mars " " The Beast Below " " The Wedding of River Song " " Hell Bent " Other Dr. Who and the Daleks Daleks – Invasion Earth: 2150 A.D. Doctor Who: The Curse of Fatal Death " The Last Day "
