Music

/wiki/Enta_da_Stage
Enta da Stage
Enta da Stage Studio album by Black Moon Released October 19, 1993 Recorded May 1992–January 1993 D&D Studios ( New York, New York ) Genre Hip hop Length 56:54 Label Nervous Producer Da Beatminerz , Buckshot Black Moon chronology Enta da Stage (1993) Diggin' in dah Vaults (1996) Singles from Enta da Stage "Who Got da Props?" Released: November 19, 1992 "How Many MC's..." Released: June 9, 1993 "I Got Cha Opin (remix)" Released: March 28, 1994 "Buck Em Down (remix)" Released: November 7, 1994 Enta da Stage is the debut album of American East Coast hip hop group Black Moon , released on October 19, 1993 through Nervous Records . The album was produced by DJ Evil Dee and Mr. Walt of Da Beatminerz . Enta da Stage features the debut of underground hip hop duo Smif-n-Wessun , as well as appearances from Havoc of Mobb Deep and Dru Ha , the co-founder of Duck Down Records . Despite being critically acclaimed and having two singles that charted on the Billboard Hot 100 ("Who Got da Props?" and "I Got Cha Opin"), the album sold poorly, and is often overlooked in favor of subsequent East Coast albums such as Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers) , Illmatic , Liquid Swords , Ready to Die , Only Built 4 Cuban Linx... , and The Infamous . Nonetheless, Enta da Stage preceded those releases and served as a precursor to the resurgence of the New York hip hop scene in the mid-1990s. Contents 1 Background 2 Music 2.1 Lyrics 2.2 Production 3 Singles 4 Reception 5 Influence 6 Track listing 7 Personnel 8 Chart history 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links Background [ edit ] The roots of Black Moon go back to Brooklyn 's Bushwick High School , where 5 ft and DJ Evil Dee met and formed a group called Unique Image. The two later met Buckshot in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn, and formed a friendship based on similar musical aspirations. [ 1 ] The newly formed group recruited Evil Dee's older brother Mr. Walt, and began recording the pre-production of their debut album at the Dewgarde Crib of Hits at Mr. Walt's house. Their first group release was their 1992 single "Who Got da Props?", which is now hailed as a classic hip hop single. [ 2 ] Black Moon signed to Nervous Records in 1992, based on the strength of the debut single, which peaked at number 86 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart in early 1993. Buckshot soon formed a close relationship with Nervous employee Drew Friedman, later known as Dru Ha . The two formed a management company named "Duck Down Management", [ 3 ] and oversaw the release of Enta da Stage as co-executive producers. The group finished recording Enta da Stage at New York City 's D&D Studios between late 1992 and early 1993, and prepared it for a late 1993 release date. Music [ edit ] Much of the acclaim the album received was due to the performance of lead MC Buckshot, who originally went by the name Buckshot Shorty. Ten of the fourteen tracks on the album are Buckshot solo tracks, and he appears on every song but "Son Get Wrec". Buck, who was eighteen at the time of the recording, was a young man trying to establish himself and his crew in the hip hop world. In a 2005 interview with MVRemix.com, Buckshot described a day in his life while recording his debut: Enta da Stage was really rough for me. It was a really rough era. A lot of people don't know what I went through personally. I think I had just turned eighteen and I had the pressure of running a management company as an eighteen year old shorter than 5'6. I had that problem of people taking my company and my representation seriously. So a day in the life around the Enta da Stage era was based on constant struggle and lettin' people know you respect Duck Down management as a real management company and not just as some little cute thing that Buckshot is doing. Nah, for real, we're management type deal. I was battling keeping Smif-n-Wessun in a good deal, I was battling trying to get Heltah Skeltah a good deal. I was battling trying to bring my record company into existence, so it was a really hard time. [ 3 ] Lyrics [ edit ] "Powaful Impak!" Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player. You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser. The track features a muscular, rhythmic production, drumbeats with a "boom, boom, bap" cadence , sparse bass lines, and Buckshot's boastful, offbeat lyricism. [ 4 ] [ 5 ] "Shit Iz Real" Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player. You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser. The track opens with Buckshot fleeing an impeding retaliation and has been described by one critic as a "soundtrack for reality's never-ending street narrative". [ 5 ] [ 6 ] "How Many MC's..." Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player. You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser. The track features a jazz horn sample and showcases Buckshot's raspy tone, deliberate flow, and intricate cadence. [ 4 ] Problems playing these files? See media help . The mindstate described in the above interview rules the content on the album, as the lyrics are loaded with violent narratives and braggadocio and little else, as Buckshot and 5 ft try to solidify their status in rap. Allmusic 's Chris Witt stated that "Emcees Buckshot and 5ft Accelerator attack their verses with an aggressive nihilism not heard since Kool G Rap 's peak." [ 7 ] 5 ft, originally known as 5FT Accelerator, appears on three tracks here, and his lyrical content does not differ from that of Buckshot's. Unlike later work by New York City peers like Nas , the lyrical content found here does not peer deeply into social issues or provide much substance. Allmusic's album review stated that "Theirs is a grim reality, filled with guns, weed and violence. Buckshot displays none of the usual gangster remorse, he is a willful public menace." [ 7 ] Buckshot was praised not only for his lyricism, but also for his lyrical delivery and breath control, with his flow and dramatic, conversational vocal tones being seen as original and entertaining. [ 8 ] In a 2005 interview with AllHipHop.com, hip hop producer 9th Wonder stated that Buckshot's style strongly influenced his current sound, and that the singles "Who Got da Props?" and "How Many MC's..." changed his life. [ 9 ] The album features an original style of choruses , which are now known as "Black Moon hooks", in which they gather a large number of people in the booth to simultaneously yell the lyrics. These vocals were provided by a number of artists, including Smif-n-Wessun , Mr. Walt, Mobb Deep 's Havoc and the trio themselves. "Niguz Talk Shit", "Who Got da Props?", "Ack Like U Want It", "Buck Em Down", "Black Smif-n-Wessun", "Son Get Wrec", "Make Munne" and "U da Man" all feature "Black Moon hooks". Production [ edit ] DJ Evil Dee and Mr. Walt of Da Beatminerz , who produced the album, put their samplers to use here, lacing the album with their signature basement sound, filled with hard drums, grimy horn arrangements and deep basslines. In the album's liner notes , DJ Evil Dee stated: "This album was done on blunted terms. Anyone who is offended by the contents of the album, FUCK YOU. Nuff said." Allmusic describes the dark production: "The Beatminerz production crew craft subterranean beats to match Buckshot's mayhem. The tracks are dark, layered with muted jazz samples, and seemingly bottomless." [ 7 ] A few of the samples used here were later recreated by a number of hip hop artists in the '90s. The single "Buck Em Down" features a sample from Donald Byrd 's "Wind Parade", a sample which was later re-used for Organized Konfusion 's 1994 concept track "Stray Bullet". "How Many MC's..." features a sample from Grover Washington, Jr. 's "Hydra", which was used for earlier hip hop tracks like EPMD 's "Underground". The iconic "Who Got Da Props" heavily utilizes a looped sample from Ronnie Laws 's jazz classic "Tidal Wave", which was featured in several hip-hop and R&B tracks, including Usher 's "Think Of You" from his self-titled 1994 album. Evil Dee and Walt take a portion of the sample and craft it into a different loop. An Enta da Stage review on OhWord.com praises the production work, stating "Though the album's success is largely attributable to Buckshot's performance, one cannot ignore the phenomenal production from the Beatminerz. They took the already dark sound of The Low End Theory and one-upped it, filtering out almost all treble and using spare, hardcore drum samples. The compositions of Mr. Walt and Evil Dee are also cleverly structured, propelling Buckshot's raps directly into the listener's psyche."..."The crackle of scratched vinyl pervades the album, contributing to the feel of warmth and timelessness. Thanks to the Beatminerz, there is something inviting about Enta da Stage , despite its confrontational lyrics." [ 8 ] Singles [ edit ] Enta da Stage featured four singles and music videos , including their debut "Who Got da Props?". In mid-1993, the "How Many MC's..." single was released; [ 10 ] it became popular in the underground rap circuit, but was not able to find success with mainstream audiences, barely breaking into the Top 50 on the Hot Rap Singles chart. [ 11 ] The third single from the album was a remix of "I Got Cha Opin", which utilized a smooth jazz sample, courtesy of Barry White 's "Playing Your Game Baby". [ 12 ] The remix featured a new chorus and all-new verses to go along with the new production. The single became the group's second Billboard Hot 100 hit in 1994, peaking at number 93. [ 11 ] The last single, "Buck Em Down", was released in mid-1994, with the music video featuring the remixed version. Both original and remixed versions featured sampled portions from Donald Byrd 's "Wind Parade" [ 12 ] and similar lyrics, with the remix featuring a different vocal delivery and edited lyrics. The album spawned additional remixes. Along with "Buck Em Down" and "I Got Cha Opin", the tracks "Ack like U Want It", "Son Get Wrec", "Shit Iz Real", "How Many MC's..." and "U da Man" all featured remixes, which were later included on Black Moon's Diggin' in dah Vaults compilation. [ 13 ] Reception [ edit ] Professional ratings Review scores Source Rating Allmusic [ 7 ] Rolling Stone [ 14 ] The Source [ 6 ] Vibe (favorable) [ 4 ] The Village Voice (mixed) [ 15 ] Washington City Paper (favorable) [ 5 ] Enta da Stage has received generally favorable reviews from most music critics and publications. Allmusic gave the album 4½ stars out of 5, while The Source gave it 4 out of 5 Mics. In 1998, the album was selected as one of The Source' s 100 Best Rap Albums, [ 16 ] and former Source magazine writer Cheo H. Coker stated in their November 1993 issue: Enta da Stage is a stunning debut that does not disappoint by any stretch of the imagination. The only term that adequately describes Black Moon's smooth combination of funky jazz rhythms and ferocious vocals is 'elegant madness.' It's nice to see that there are still shining spots of originality to be found in a genre that's becoming increasingly overrun by bogus bandwagon jumpers just out to make a quick buck. Make this jammie a priority. [ 6 ] Though praised for its originality and production, Enta da Stage has also seen criticism for its monotony and lack of lyrical substance. Rolling Stone magazine gave the album a 3-star rating, and criticized the release for "ignorance", and claimed that the release failed to capitalize on its promise, stating that "They leave blank the ultimate canvas – the self." [ 14 ] In naming it the fourth greatest album on About.com 's list of the Best Rap Albums of 1993, columnist Henry Adaso wrote of the album favorably, stating "Unlike most hip-hop albums of its era, Enta Da Stage eschewed confrontational raps and opted for brooding, electrifying brand of hip-hop." [ 17 ] Influence [ edit ] Though not as widely heralded as similar groundbreaking East Coast albums such as Nas ' Illmatic , The Notorious B.I.G. 's Ready to Die , Wu-Tang Clan 's Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers) , Onyx 's Bacdafucup and Mobb Deep 's The Infamous , Enta da Stage was critically acclaimed on a similar level. [ 14 ] Though all of the albums mentioned above were able to reach at least Gold status , Enta da Stage , released before all of these albums, has not sold nearly as well, selling just over 350,000 copies in the U.S. as of June 2006. [ 18 ] Allmusic described the importance of the album: "It set the tone for much of the hip hop to follow. Biggie Smalls suicidal thoughts and Noreaga 's boisterous thuggery both have their roots here. The album marked a turning point in hip hop." [ 7 ] Enta da Stage has also been described as "Era defining", [ 19 ] and was one of the pioneering releases during the return of New York City's street hip hop resurgence of the mid '90s, after the West Coast 's reign of the early '90s. [ 20 ] Enta da Stage is still prominent among hip hop artists today, such as lyrics from "How Many MC's..." being used as a hook for Jedi Mind Trick's song "Speech Cobras". The album also served as the introduction of the supergroup Boot Camp Clik . The collective was a prominent underground rap group in the 1990s – also producing the acclaimed Smif-n-Wessun 's Dah Shinin' , Heltah Skeltah 's Nocturnal , and O.G.C. 's Da Storm . Enta da Stage heralded the debut of Da Beatminerz . After producing here, and on other Boot Camp albums Dah Shinin' , Nocturnal and Da Storm , Mr. Walt and Evil Dee went on to expand their sounds, and produce for popular artists like Afu-Ra , Big Daddy Kane , Craig G , De La Soul , Dilated Peoples , Eminem , Flipmode Squad , Jean Grae , KRS-One , M.O.P. , Naughty by Nature , O.C. and Black Star . The album is extensively broken down track-by-track by Buckshot , DJ Evil Dee , and Mr. Walt of Da Beatminerz in Brian Coleman's book Check the Technique (2007). [ 21 ] Track listing [ edit ] Track listing and producer information is taken from the CD. [ 22 ] # Title Songwriters Producer(s) Performer(s) Samples [ 12 ] 1 "Powaful Impak!" Ewart Dewgarde , Kenyatta Blake DJ Evil Dee of Da Beatminerz , Buckshot Buckshot "Hard Times" by Baby Huey " Scenario " by A Tribe Called Quest 2 "Niguz Talk Shit" Ewart Dewgarde, Kenyatta Blake DJ Evil Dee of Da Beatminerz Buckshot "Bitches Brew" by Miles Davis "Cussin', Cryin' & Carryin' On" by Ike & Tina Turner " Gangsta Bitch " by Apache 3 "Who Got da Props?" Ewart Dewgarde, Kenyatta Blake DJ Evil Dee of Da Beatminerz Buckshot "Sport" by Lightnin Rod "It's a New Day" by Skull Snaps "Tidal Wave" by Ronnie Laws "Fantastic Freaks at the Dixie" by Grand Wizard Theodore 4 "Ack Like U Want It" Ewart Dewgarde, Walt Dewgarde , Kenyatta Blake, Kasim Reid DJ Evil Dee & Mr. Walt of Da Beatminerz Buckshot, 5 ft "Tell Me How Do You Feel" by Lee Michaels "Son of Mr. Greene Genes" by Frank Zappa 5 "Buck Em Down" Ewart Dewgarde, Kenyatta Blake, Larry Mizell DJ Evil Dee of Da Beatminerz Buckshot "Hihache" by Lafayette Afro Rock Band "Wind Parade" by Donald Byrd 6 "Black Smif-n-Wessun" Ewart Dewgarde, Tekomin Williams , Kenyatta Blake, Darrell Yates DJ Evil Dee of Da Beatminerz Smif-n-Wessun , Buckshot "Misdemeanor" by Ahmad Jamal "Spinning Wheel" by Lonnie Smith 7 "Son Get Wrec" Kasim Reid, Ewart Dewgarde DJ Evil Dee of Da Beatminerz 5 ft "Message from the Soul Sisters" by Myra Barnes "Sport" by Lightnin Rod "Oblighetto" by Brother Jack McDuff "Season of the Witch" by Mike Bloomfield , Al Kooper and Steve Stills 8 "Make Munne" Walt Dewgarde, Kenyatta Blake Mr. Walt of Da Beatminerz Buckshot "I Need Your Lovin'" by Alyson Williams "We in There" by Boogie Down Productions 9 "Slave" Ewart Dewgarde, Kenyatta Blake DJ Evil Dee of Da Beatminerz Buckshot "Rule of Mind" by 9th Creation 10 "I Got Cha Opin" Walt Dewgarde, Kenyatta Blake Mr. Walt of Da Beatminerz Buckshot "Come Live with Me" by Ten Wheel Drive 11 "Shit Iz Real" Ewart Dewgarde, Kenyatta Blake DJ Evil Dee of Da Beatminerz Buckshot "Ridin' High" by Faze-O "Love Song to Catherine" by John Klemmer 12 "Enta da Stage" Walt Dewgarde, Kenyatta Blake, Ernie Watts, Fredro Scruggs , Kirk Jones , Tyrone Taylor , Marlon Fletcher Mr. Walt of Da Beatminerz Buckshot "It's a New Day" by James Brown "Eye of the Cosmos" by Cannonball Adderley "Spinning Wheel" by Lonnie Smith "Shifftee" by Onyx "Journey in Satchidananda" by Alice Coltrane 13 "How Many MC's..." Ewart Dewgarde, Walt Dewgarde, Kenyatta Blake, Grover Washington Jr. DJ Evil Dee & Mr. Walt of Da Beatminerz Buckshot "Hydra" by Grover Washington, Jr. "Nice Girl" by Kellee Patterson "My Philosophy" by Boogie Down Productions 14 "U da Man" Ewart Dewgarde, Kasim Reid, Drew Friedman, Kejuan Muchita , Tekomin Williams, Darrell Yates, Kenyatta Blake DJ Evil Dee of Da Beatminerz 5 ft, Dru-Ha , Havoc , Smif-n-Wessun , Buckshot "Risin' to the Top" by Keni Burke "Get out of My Life, Woman" by Lee Dorsey "Ack Like U Want It" was not on the cassette or the vinyl release. "Slave" was not on the vinyl release. Personnel [ edit ] Credits for Enta da Stage adapted from liner notes. [ 22 ] Buckshot – vocals, background vocals, producer, executive producer 5ft – vocals, producer, background vocals DJ Evil Dee – producer, background vocals Mr. Walt – producer, background vocals Tek – vocals, background vocals Steele – vocals, background vocals Havoc – vocals, background vocals Dru Ha – vocals, background vocals, executive producer Everette Lawson – background vocals Lynn Blackwell – background vocals Leo "Swift" Morris – main engineer Eddie Sancho – assistant engineer Luke Allen – assistant engineer Luis Tineo – assistant engineer Dave Carpenter – assistant engineer Joe Quinde – assistant engineer Merge One – art direction C² – art direction, photography Chi Modu – photography Chart history [ edit ] Album Chart (1993) [ 23 ] Peak position U.S. Top Heatseekers 7 U.S. Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums 33 Singles Year Song Chart positions [ 11 ] Billboard Hot 100 Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Singles & Tracks Hot Rap Singles Hot Dance Music/Maxi-Singles Sales 1993 "Who Got da Props?" 86 60 28 28 "How Many MC's..." — 97 48 17 1994 "I Got Cha Opin" (remix) 93 55 15 4 "Buck Em Down" — 81 17 2 Notes [ edit ] ^ "5ft interview with MVRemix.com" . Retrieved June 20, 2006 . ^ "Black Moon interview with Yahoo! Music" . Archived from the original on September 24, 2006 . Retrieved June 21, 2006 . ^ a b "Buckshot interview with MVRemix.com" . Retrieved June 20, 2006 . ^ a b c Smith, Chris H. " Review: Enta da Stage ". Vibe : 112. November 1993. ^ a b c Hill, Bobby. Review: Enta da Stage . Washington City Paper . Retrieved on 2009-10-12. ^ a b c "Black Moon "Enta Da Stage " " . Archived from the original (Album Review by Cheo H. Coker) on November 25, 2005 . Retrieved April 20, 2006 . ^ a b c d e Thomas, Vincent. Review: Enta da Stage . Allmusic . Retrieved on 2009-10-12. ^ a b "Enta Da Stage review" . Retrieved June 21, 2006 . ^ "AllHipHop.com interview with Buckshot & 9th Wonder" . Retrieved May 26, 2008 . ^ " " How Many MC's..." single" . Retrieved June 26, 2006 . ^ a b c "Allmusic Singles Chart Positions" . Retrieved June 26, 2006 . ^ a b c "TheBreaks.com album samples" . Retrieved June 26, 2006 . ^ "Allmusic "Diggin' In Dah Vaults" Track Listing" . Retrieved June 26, 2006 . ^ a b c Touré (April 7, 1994). "Black Moon: Enta Da Stage" . Rolling Stone (New York) (679). Archived from the original on June 23, 2013 . Retrieved June 23, 2013 . ^ Levy, Joe. " Review: Enta da Stage ". The Village Voice : May 10, 1994. (Transcribed by The Dub Project under the title "Taking Cypress Hill (By Strategy)") ^ "The top 100 Best Rap Albums" . The Source Albums . Rocklist.net . Retrieved October 1, 2006 . ^ Adaso, Henry. Best Rap Albums of 1993 – p. 4 . About.com . Retrieved on 2009-03-11. ^ "Duck Down Records History" . Archived from the original on June 15, 2006 . Retrieved June 20, 2006 . ^ "Soldiering on through Bucktown" . Retrieved June 20, 2006 . ^ "Sputnik Music's review of Enta Da Stage" . Retrieved 2006-07-09 . ^ Coleman, Brian, 2007, Check The Technique : Liner Notes For Hip-Hop Junkies , Villard, Random House. ^ a b "Enta Da Stage by Black Moon CD" . CD Universe. 1996–2006 . Retrieved 2006-06-28 . ^ "Allmusic Album Chart Positions" . Retrieved June 26, 2006 . References [ edit ] Brian Coleman (2007). Check the Technique . Random House. ISBN 978-0-8129-7775-2 . Nathan Brackett, Christian Hoard (2004). The New Rolling Stone Album Guide: Completely Revised and Updated 4th Edition . Simon and Schuster. ISBN 0-7432-0169-8 . External links [ edit ] Enta da Stage at Discogs Album Accolades at acclaimedmusic.net v t e Boot Camp Clik Groups Black Moon Smif-n-Wessun Heltah Skeltah O.G.C. Members Buckshot Steele Tek Sean Price Rock Starang Wondah Louieville Sluggah Top Dog Albums Enta da Stage Dah Shinin' Nocturnal Diggin' in Dah Vaults Da Storm For the People The Rude Awakening Magnum Force War Zone The M-Pire Shrikez Back The BDI Thug Duck Down Presents: The Album Basic Training: Boot Camp Clik's Greatest Hits The Chosen Few Collect Dis Edition Total Eclipse Monkey Barz Chemistry Smif 'n' Wessun: Reloaded The Last Stand Dinner Time Jesus Price Superstar Casualties of War Smif-n-Wessun: The Album The Formula D.I.R.T. Welcome to Bucktown Survival Skills Best Kept Secret Amerikkkah's Nightmare, Pt. 2 Random Axe Monumental Mic Tyson The Solution Compilations Duck Down Presents: The Album Basic Training: Boot Camp Clik's Greatest Hits Collect Dis Edition Related articles Duck Down Records Representativz Da Beatminerz v t e Black Moon Buckshot 5ft DJ Evil Dee Albums Enta da Stage Diggin' in dah Vaults War Zone Total Eclipse Buckshot albums The BDI Thug Chemistry The Formula Singles "Who Got da Props?" "How Many MC's..." "I Got Cha Opin" "Buck 'em Down" "Black Smif-N-Wessun" "How Many Emcees (DJ Evil Dee Remix)" "War Zone" "Showdown" "Two Turntables and a Mic" "Worldwind" "Annihilation" "Jump Up" "Stay Real" "That'z How It Iz" "Why We Act This Way" Related articles Discography Boot Camp Clik Smif-n-Wessun Heltah Skeltah O.G.C. Duck Down Records Da Beatminerz
