Religion, mysticism and mythology
Religion, mysticism and mythology biographies
/wiki/Maximus_the_Confessor
Maximus the Confessor
Saint Maximus Icon of St. Maximus Confessor, Theologian, Homologetes Born c. 580 Constantinople or Palestine Died 13 August 662 ( 662-08-13 ) exile in Tsageri , [ 1 ] Georgia Venerated in Eastern Orthodox Church Roman Catholic Church Anglican Communion Lutheranism Canonized pre- congregation Feast 13 August ( Gregorian Calendar ), 21 January or 13 August ( Julian Calendar ) Part of a series on Neoplatonism Concepts Theory of Forms Form of the Good Demiurge Henosis Microcosm and macrocosm Nous Arche Logos Hypostasis Works Enneads De Mysteriis Aegyptiorum Liber de Causis The Consolation of Philosophy The Incoherence of the Incoherence De divisione naturae People Plato Ammonius Saccas Plotinus ( disciples ) Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian the Apostate Sallustius Hypatia Plutarch of Athens Macrobius Augustine of Hippo Syrianus Proclus Pseudo-Dionysius Damascius Simplicius of Cilicia Boethius Maximus the Confessor Johannes Scotus Eriugena Al-Farabi Solomon ibn Gabirol Isaac the Blind Thierry of Chartres Gemistus Pletho Marsilio Ficino Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Cambridge Platonists Related topics Platonism ( in the Renaissance ) Platonic Academy Middle Platonism Kabbalah Spirituality Druze Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Neoplatonism and Christianity / Gnosticism Philosophy portal v t e Maximus the Confessor ( Greek : Μάξιμος ὁ Ὁμολογητής ), also known as Maximus the Theologian and Maximus of Constantinople (c. 580 – 13 August 662), was a Christian monk , theologian , and scholar. In his early life, Maximus was a civil servant, and an aide to the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius . However, he gave up this life in the political sphere to enter into the monastic life. Maximus had studied diverse schools of philosophy, and certainly what was common for his time, the Platonic dialogues, the works of Aristotle, and numerous later Platonic commentators on Aristotle and Plato, like Plotinus, Porphyry, Iamblichus, and Proclus. When one of his friends began espousing the Christological position known as Monothelitism , Maximus was drawn into the controversy, in which he supported an interpretation of the Chalcedonian formula on the basis of which it was asserted that Jesus had both a human and a divine will . Maximus is venerated in both Eastern Christianity and Western Christianity . He was eventually persecuted for his Christological positions; following a trial, his tongue and right hand were mutilated. He was then exiled and died on August 13, 662 in Tsageri, Georgia. However, his theology was upheld by the Third Council of Constantinople and he was venerated as a saint soon after his death. He is almost unique among saints in that he has two feast days : the 13th of August and the 21st of January. His title of Confessor means that he suffered for the Christian faith, but was not directly martyred . The Life of the Virgin , the only extant copy of which is in a Georgian translation, is commonly, albeit mistakenly, attributed to him, and is considered to be one of the earliest complete biographies of Mary, the mother of Jesus . Contents 1 Life 1.1 Early life 1.2 Involvement in Monothelite controversy 1.3 Trial and exile 2 Legacy 3 Theology 4 Reception 5 Writings 6 References 7 Further reading 7.1 Collections of Maximus' writings 7.2 On the theology of Saint Maximus 8 External links Life [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Very little is known about the details of Maximus' life prior to his involvement in the theological and political conflicts of the Monothelite controversy. [ 2 ] Numerous Maximian scholars call substantial portions of the Maronite biography into question, including Maximus' birth in Palestine, which was a common seventh century trope to discredit an opponent. Moreover, the exceptional education Maximus evidently received could not have been had in any other part of the Byzantine Empire during that time except for Constantinople, and possibly Caesarea and Alexandria. It is also very unlikely that anyone of low social birth, as the Maronite biography describes Maximus, could have ascended by the age of thirty to be the Protoasecretis of the Emperor Heraclius, one of the most powerful positions in the Empire. It is more likely that Maximus was born of an aristocratic family and received an unparalleled education in philosophy, mathematics, astronomy, etc. It is true, however, that Maximus did not study rhetoric as he himself notes in the prologue to his Earlier Ambigua to John, [ 3 ] to which his lack of high stylistic by Byzantine standards attests. Nevertheless, for reasons not explained in the few autobiographical details to be gleaned from his texts, Maximus left public life and took monastic vows at the monastery of Philippicus in Chrysopolis, a city across the Bosporus from Constantinople (later known as Scutari, the modern Turkish city of Üsküdar ). Maximus was elevated to the position of abbot of the monastery. [ 4 ] "Theology without practice is the theology of demons". (One of his most famous quotes) When the Persians conquered Anatolia , Maximus was forced to flee to a monastery near Carthage . It was there that he came under the tutelage of Saint Sophronius , and began studying in detail with him the Christological writings of Gregory of Nazianzus and Dionysius the Areopagite . Maximus continued his career as a theological and spiritual writer while his lengthy stay in Carthage. [ 5 ] Maximus was also held in very high esteem by the exarch Gregory , the eparch George [ 6 ] and the population as a holy man, ostensibly becoming an influential unofficial political advisor and spiritual head in North Africa. Involvement in Monothelite controversy [ edit ] While Maximus was in Carthage, a controversy broke out regarding how to understand the interaction between the human and divine natures within the person of Jesus . This Christological debate was the latest development in disagreements that began following the First Council of Nicaea in 325, and were intensified following the Council of Chalcedon in 451. The Monothelite position was developed as a compromise between the dyophysitists and the miaphysists , who believed dyophysitism is conceptually indistinguishable from Nestorianism . The Monothelites adhered to the Chalcedonian definition of the hypostatic union : that two natures, one divine and one human, were united in the person of Christ. However, they went on to say that Christ had only a divine will and no human will (Monothelite is derived from the Greek for "one will"), which led some to charge them with Apollinarian monophysitism . A silver hexagramma showing Constans II with his son. Constans II supported Monothelitism , and had Maximus exiled for his refusal to agree to Monothelite teachings. The Monothelite position was promulgated by Patriarch Sergius I of Constantinople and by Maximus' friend and successor as the Abbot of Chrysopolis, Pyrrhus . [ 7 ] Following the death of Sergius in 638, Pyrrhus succeeded him as Patriarch, but was shortly deposed due to political circumstances. During Pyrrhus' exile from Constantinople, Maximus and the deposed Patriarch held a public debate on the issue of Monothelitism. In the debate, which was held in the presence of many North African bishops, Maximus took the position that Jesus possessed both a human and a divine will. The result of the debate was that Pyrrhus admitted the error of the Monothelite position, and Maximus accompanied him to Rome in 645. [ 8 ] However, on the death of Emperor Heraclius and the ascension of Emperor Constans II , Pyrrhus returned to Constantinople and recanted of his acceptance of the Dyothelite ("two wills") position. Maximus may have remained in Rome, because he was present when the newly elected Pope Martin I convened the Lateran Council of 649 at the Lateran Basilica in Rome. [ 9 ] The 105 bishops present condemned Monothelitism in the official acts of the synod, which some believe may have been written by Maximus. [ 10 ] It was in Rome that Pope Martin and Maximus were arrested in 653 under orders from Constans II , who supported the Monothelite doctrine. Pope Martin was condemned without a trial, and died before he could be sent to the Imperial Capital. [ 11 ] Trial and exile [ edit ] Maximus' refusal to accept Monothelitism caused him to be brought to the imperial capital of Constantinople to be tried as a heretic in 658. In Constantinople, Monothelitism had gained the favor of both the Emperor and the Patriarch of Constantinople. Maximus stood behind the Dyothelite position and was sent back into exile for four more years. In 662, Maximus was placed on trial once more, and was once more convicted of heresy. Following the trial Maximus was tortured, having his tongue cut out, so he could no longer speak his rebellion, and his right hand cut off, so that he could no longer write letters. [ 12 ] Maximus was then exiled to the Lazica or Colchis region of modern-day Georgia and was cast in the fortress of Schemarum, perhaps Muris-Tsikhe near the modern town of Tsageri . [ 13 ] He died soon thereafter, on 13 August 662. [ 14 ] The events of the trials of Maximus were recorded by Anastasius Bibliothecarius . Legacy [ edit ] Maximus the Confessor and His Miracles . An early 17th-century Stroganov school icon from Solvychegodsk . Along with Pope Martin I, Maximus was vindicated by the Third Council of Constantinople (the Sixth Ecumenical Council , 680–681), which declared that Christ possessed both a human and a divine will. With this declaration Monothelitism became heresy, and Maximus was posthumously declared innocent of all charges against him. Maximus is among those Christians who were venerated as saints shortly after their deaths. The vindication of Maximus' theological position made him extremely popular within a generation after his death, and his cause was aided by the accounts of miracles at his tomb. [ 15 ] In the Roman Catholic Church the veneration of Maximus began prior to the foundation of the Congregation for the Causes of Saints . Maximus is one of the last men to be recognized by both the Orthodox and Catholic Churches as a Father of the Church. Theology [ edit ] As a student of Pseudo-Dionysius , Maximus was one of many Christian theologians who preserved and interpreted the earlier Neo-Platonic philosophy, including the thought of such figures as Plotinus and Proclus . Maximus' work on Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite was continued by John Scotus Eriugena at the request of Charles the Bald . [ 16 ] The Platonic influence on Maximus' thought can be seen most clearly in his theological anthropology . Here, Maximus adopted the Platonic model of exitus-reditus (exit and return), teaching that humanity was made in the image of God , and the purpose of salvation is to restore us to unity with God. [ 17 ] This emphasis on divinization or theosis helped secure Maximus' place in Eastern theology, as these concepts have always held an important place in Eastern Christianity. [ 18 ] Christologically Maximus insisted on a strict dyophysitism , which can be seen as a corollary of the emphasis on theosis . In terms of salvation, humanity is intended to be fully united with God. This is possible for Maximus because God was first fully united with humanity in the incarnation. [ 16 ] If Christ did not become fully human (if, for example, he only had a divine and not a human will), then salvation was no longer possible, as humanity could not become fully divine. [ 19 ] Furthermore, in his works Maximus the Confessor argued the unconditionality of the divine incarnation. [ 20 ] Regarding salvation, Maximus has been described as a proponent of apocatastasis or universal reconciliation , the idea that all rational souls will eventually be redeemed, like Origen and St. Gregory of Nyssa . [ 21 ] While this claim has been disputed, [ 22 ] others have argued that Maximus shared this belief in universal reconciliation with his most spiritually mature students. [ 23 ] Reception [ edit ] Maximus' work was translated by the 9th-century, Irish philosopher and mystical theologian Johannes Scotus Eriugena . In Eastern Christianity , Maximus has always been influential. The Eastern theologians Symeon the New Theologian and Gregory Palamas are seen as intellectual heirs to Maximus. Further, a number of Maximus' works are included in the Greek Philokalia , a collection of some of the most influential Orthodox Christian writers. Writings [ edit ] The original edition in Latin of Balthasar Corderius (Antwerp 1634) attributes all of the Scholia to Maximus, but the authorship has been questioned with Hans Urs von Balthasar (1940, 1961) attributing some of the Scholia to John of Scythopolis . [ 24 ] Ambigua – An exploration of difficult passages in the work of Pseudo-Dionysius and Gregory of Nazianzus , focusing on Christological issues. This also was later translated by Eriugena . Commentary on Psalm 59 Commentary on the Lord's Prayer Centuries on Love and Centuries on Theology – Two sets of works in the ascetic style of the 'century', where groups of one hundred short sayings are used as meditations during prayer. Hymns Mystagogy – A commentary and meditation on the Eucharistic liturgy. Questions to Thalassius – a lengthy exposition on various Scriptural texts. This was later translated by Eriugena . Disputation with Pyrrhus - anti-monotholete treatise in conversation with Patriarch Pyrrhus of Constantinople Scholia – commentary on the earlier writings of Pseudo-Dionysius. The Ascetic Life – a discussion on the monastic rule of life. Life of the Virgin – earliest complete biography of Mary, the mother of Jesus [ 25 ] References [ edit ] ^ Ambebi.ge ^ The following account is based on the lengthy tenth-century biography catalogued as BHG 1234 and printed in Migne's Patrologia Graeca (90, 68A1-109B9). In recent years, however, this account has been called into question on the basis of new scholarly research. The author, or rather compiler, of BHG 1234 turns out to have used one of the biographies of Theodore the Studite (BHG 1755) to fill the gaps in the information he had on Maximus (See W. Lackner, Zu Quellen und Datierung der Maximosvita (BHG 3 1234), in Analecta Bollandiana 85 [1967], p. 285-316). The information the compiler of BHG 1234 did have he drew from the passions extant at the time, in which nothing is said about Maximus' early years (See B. Roosen, Maximi Confessoris Vitae et Passiones Graecae. The Development of a Hagiographic Dossier, in Byzantion 80 [2010], forthcoming). On the basis of mostly internal evidence from Maximus' writings, C. Boudignon advocates a Palestinian birth for Maximus instead (See C. Boudignon, Maxime le Confesseur était-il constantinopolitain?, in B. Janssens – B. Roosen – P. Van Deun [ed.], Philomathestatos. Studies in Greek and Byzantine Texts Presented to Jacques Noret for his Sixty-Fifth Birthday [= Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta 137], Leuven – Paris – Dudley, MA, 2004, p. 11-43; and id., Le pouvoir de l'anathème ou Maxime le Confesseur et les moines palestiniens du VIIe siècle, in A. Camplani - G. Filoramo, Foundations of Power and Conflicts of Authority in Late-Antique Monasticism. Proceedings of the International Seminar, Turin, December 2–4, 2004 [= Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta, 157], Leuven - Paris - Dudley, MA, 2007, p. 245-274). If this is true, it confirms the value of the Maronite biography, even though it is clearly anti-Maximian. ^ Constas, Nicholas (2014). Nicholas Constas, ed. On Difficulties in the Church Fathers: The Ambigua, Volume 1 . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, Dumbarton Oaks Medieval Library Series, Volume 28. ISBN 978-0-674-72666-6 . ^ M. Gildas (1913). " St. Maximus of Constantinople ". In Herbermann, Charles. Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company. "This great man was of a noble family of Constantinople." ^ Berthold, George C. (1997). "Maximus Confessor". In Everett Ferguson. Encyclopedia of Early Christianity . New York: Garland Publishing. ISBN 0-8153-1663-1 . ^ Pringle, Denys (1981). The Defence of Byzantine Africa from Justinian to the Arab Conquest: An Account of the Military History and Archaeology of the African Provinces in the Sixth and Seventh Century . Oxford, United Kingdom: British Archaeological Reports. p. 46. ISBN 0-86054-119-3 . ^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " St. Maximus of Constantinople ". Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company. : "The first action of St. Maximus that we know of in this affair is a letter sent by him to Pyrrhus, then an abbot at Chrysopolis ..." ^ Philip Schaff , History of the Christian Church , Volume IV: Mediaeval Christianity. A.D. 590-1073 (online edition) §111 , accessed 15 January 2007. ^ "Maximus the Confessor", in The Westminster Dictionary of Church History , ed. Jerald Brauer (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1971) ( ISBN 0-664-21285-9 ). This is generally known as the First or Second Lateran Synod , and is not recognized as an Ecumenical Council . ^ For example, Gerald Berthold, "Maximus Confessor" in Encyclopedia of Early Christianity , (New York:Garland, 1997) ( ISBN 0-8153-1663-1 ). ^ David Hughes Farmer, The Oxford Dictionary of the Saints (Oxford:Oxford University Press, 1987) ( ISBN 0-19-869149-1 ) p.288. This made Martin the last Bishop of Rome to be venerated as a martyr. ^ Gerald Berthold, "Maximus Confessor" in Encyclopedia of Early Christianity , (New York:Garland, 1997) ( ISBN 0-8153-1663-1 ). ^ George C. Berthold (1985), Maximus Confessor: Selected Writings , p. 31. Paulist Press, ISBN 0-8091-2659-1 . ^ For example, see Catholic Forum . The injuries Maximus sustained while being tortured and the conditions of his exile both contributed to his death, causing Maximus to be considered a martyr by many. ^ For example, from the biography provided by the Orthodox Church in America : "Three candles appeared over the grave of St Maximus and burned miraculously. This was a sign that St Maximus was a beacon of Orthodoxy during his lifetime, and continues to shine forth as an example of virtue for all. Many healings occurred at his tomb." ^ a b Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " St. Maximus of Constantinople ". Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company. ^ "Maximos, St., Confessor" in the Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church, ed. F.L. Cross (London: Oxford Press, 1958) ( ISBN 0-19-211522-7 ). One sees this especially in Maximus' Mystagogy and Ambigua . ^ "Maximus the Confessor" in Michael O'Carroll, Trinitas: A Theological Encyclopedia of the Holy Trinity (Delaware:Michael Glazier, Inc, 1987) ( ISBN 0-8146-5595-5 ). ^ "Maximos, St., Confessor" in the Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church, ed. F.L. Cross (London: Oxford Press, 1958) ( ISBN 0-19-211522-7 ). ^ Hieromonk Artemije Radosavljević, Τὸ Μυστήριον τῆς Σωτηρίας κατὰ τὸν Ἅγιον Μάξιμον τὸν Ὁμολογητήν. Αθήνα, 1975. English version: Bishop Artemije Radosavljević Why Did God Become Man? The Unconditionality of the Divine Incarnation. Deification as the End and Fulfillment of Salvation According to St. Maximos the Confessor — Source: Τὸ Μυστήριον... [The mystery of salvation according to St. Maximos the Confessor] (Athens: 1975), pp. 180-196 ^ " Apokatastasis " Theandros: An Online Journal of Orthodox Christian Theology and Philosophy . Accessed Aug. 12, 2007. Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Apocatastasis ". Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company. ^ Hans Urs von Balthasar, Cosmic Liturgy: The Universe According to Maximus the Confessor (Ignatius Press, 2003), 355-356. ISBN 0-89870-758-7 . ^ John C. Médaille. " The Daring Hope of Hans Urs Von Balthasar ". Accessed Aug. 12, 2007. ^ Cosmic liturgy: the universe according to Maximus the Confessor - Page 393 Hans Urs von Balthasar 1961 English translation 2003 ^ Stephen J. Shoemaker, trans., Maximus the Confessor, The Life of the Virgin: Translated, with an Introduction and Notes (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2012) ( ISBN 0300175043 ); Maximus's Mary , by Sally Cuneen, Commonweal Magazine , December 04, 2009 Further reading [ edit ] Collections of Maximus' writings [ edit ] Maximus Confessor: Selected Writings (Classics of Western Spirituality) . Ed. George C. Berthold. Paulist Press, 1985. ISBN 0-8091-2659-1 . On the Cosmic Mystery of Jesus Christ: Selected Writings from St. Maximus the Confessor (St. Vladimir's Seminary Press "Popular Patristics" Series) . Ed. & Trans Paul M. Blowers, Robert Louis Wilken. St. Vladimir's Seminary Press, 2004. ISBN 0-88141-249-X . St. Maximus the Confessor: The Ascetic Life, The Four Centuries on Charity (Ancient Christian Writers) . Ed. Polycarp Sherwood. Paulist Press, 1955. ISBN 0-8091-0258-7 . Maximus the Confessor (The Early Church Fathers) Intro. & Trans. Andrew Louth. Routledge, 1996. ISBN 0-415-11846-8 Maximus the Confessor and his Companions (Documents from Exile) (Oxford Early Christian Texts) . Ed. and Trans. Pauline Allen, Bronwen Neil. Oxford University Press, 2004. ISBN 0-19-829991-5 . On the theology of Saint Maximus [ edit ] Balthasar, Hans Urs (von) . Cosmic Liturgy: The Universe According to Maximus the Confessor . Ignatius Press, 2003. ISBN 0-89870-758-7 . Cooper, Adam G. The body in St Maximus Confessor: Holy Flesh, Wholly Deified . Oxford Early Christian Studies. Oxford University Press, 2005. ISBN 0-19-927570-X . Lauritzen, Frederick. Pagan energies in Maximus the Confessor: the influence of Proclus on the Ad Thomam 5 in Greek Roman and Byzantine Studies 52.2 (2012) [1] Loudovikos, Nikolaos, Protopresbyter. He Eucharistiake Ontologia: Ta Eucharistiaka Themelia Tou Einai, Hos En Koinonia Ginnesthai, Sten Eschatologike Ontologia Tou Hagiou Maximou Tou Homologete . Published in Greek. Translated Title: Eucharistic Ontology: The Eucharistic Fundaments of Being as Becoming in Communion, in the Eschatological Ontology of St. Maximus the Confessor . Ekdoseis Domos, Athens, Greece, 1992. ISBN 960-7217-72-1 . Nichols, Aidan. Byzantine Gospel: Maximus the Confessor in Modern Scholarship . T. & T. Clark Publishers, 1994. ISBN 0-567-09651-3 . Hieromonk Artemije Radosavljević, Τὸ Μυστήριον τῆς Σωτηρίας κατὰ τὸν Ἅγιον Μάξιμον τὸν Ὁμολογητήν. Αθήνα, 1975. English version: Bishop Artemije Radosavljević Why Did God Become Man? The Unconditionality of the Divine Incarnation. Deification as the End and Fulfillment of Salvation According to St. Maximos the Confessor — Source: Τὸ Μυστήριον... [The mystery of salvation according to St. Maximos the Confessor] (Athens: 1975), pp. 180–196 Thunberg, Lars. Microcosm and Mediator: The Theological Anthropology of Maximus the Confessor. Second Edition. Open Court, 1995. ISBN 0-8126-9211-X Tollefsen, Torstein Theodor. The Christocentric Cosmology of St Maximus the Confessor . Oxford Early Christian Studies. Oxford University Press, 2008. ISBN 978-0-19-923714-2 . Törönen, Melchisedec. Union and Distinction in the Thought of Maximus the Confessor . Oxford Early Christian Studies. Oxford University Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0199296118 Tympas, G. C. (2014). Carl Jung and Maximus the Confessor on Psychic Development . Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-62517-3 . External links [ edit ] Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article: Μάξιμος ὁ Ὁμολογητής Selected works of Saint Maximus Confessor Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " St. Maximus of Constantinople ". Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company. Maximus Confessor in the Catholic Forum Maximus Confessor in the Orthodox Church in America Greek Opera Omnia by Migne Patrologia Graeca with analytical indexes Summary of Maximus' biography of Mary (mother of Jesus) by Commonweal magazine Uploaded online academic papers on Maximus the Confessor v t e Catholic saints Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Guadalupe Laus Miraculous Medal Lourdes Fatima Archangels Gabriel Michael Raphael Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Matriarchs David Noah Solomon Joseph (father of Jesus) Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Greater John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Disciples Apollos Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Martyrs Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Drina Martyrs Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs Joan of Arc Lübeck martyrs Korean Martyrs Martyrology Martyrs of China Martyrs of Japan Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Perpetua and Felicity Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Three Martyrs of Chimbote Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lerins Zephyrinus Confessors Anatolius Chariton the Confessor Edward the Confessor Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Salonius Theophanes the Confessor Doctors Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Genevieve Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti Narcisa de Jesús Rose of Lima Apologetics Anselm of Canterbury Aristides of Athens Augustine of Hippo Clement of Alexandria Epistle to Diognetus John Henry Newman Justin Martyr Quadratus of Athens Theophilus of Antioch Thomas Aquinas Saints portal Catholicism portal Saints portal Authority control WorldCat VIAF : 106970843 LCCN : n79055110 ISNI : 0000 0001 2096 7938 GND : 118732188 SUDOC : 027514668
