Literature and theatre

/wiki/Nancy_Drew
Nancy Drew
This article is about the fictional character.  For the film, see Nancy Drew (2007 film) .  For the 1977 television series, see The Hardy Boys/Nancy Drew Mysteries . Nancy Drew 1959 cover of the revised version of The Secret of the Old Clock , the first Nancy Drew mystery Created by Edward Stratemeyer Information Gender Female Occupation Detective Nationality American Nancy Drew is a fictional character in a mystery fiction series created by publisher Edward Stratemeyer . The character first appeared in the year 1930; the books have been ghostwritten by a number of authors and are published under the collective pseudonym Carolyn Keene . [ 1 ] Over the decades the character has evolved in response to changes in US culture and tastes. The books were extensively revised and shortened, beginning in 1959, in part to lower printing costs and to eliminate racist stereotypes, [ 2 ] with arguable success. [ 3 ] [ 4 ] In the revision process, the heroine's original character was changed to be less assertive and more feminine. [ 5 ] In the 1980s an older and more professional Nancy emerged in a new series, The Nancy Drew Files , that included romantic subplots for the sleuth. [ 6 ] In 2004 the original Nancy Drew Mystery Stories series, begun in 1930, was ended and a new series, Girl Detective , was launched, in which the title character drives a hybrid electric vehicle and uses a cell phone. In 2013 the Girl Detective series was ended and a new series called Nancy Drew Diaries was launched. Illustrations of the character have evolved over time to reflect contemporary styles. [ 7 ] The character has proved continuously popular worldwide: at least 80 million copies of the books have been sold, [ 8 ] and the books have been translated into over 45 languages. Nancy Drew has featured in five films, two television shows, and a number of popular computer games; she also appears in a variety of merchandise sold over the world. A cultural icon , Nancy Drew has been cited as a formative influence by a number of women, from Supreme Court Justices Sandra Day O'Connor [ 9 ] and Sonia Sotomayor to Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton [ 10 ] and former First Lady Laura Bush . [ 11 ] Feminist literary critics have analyzed the character's enduring appeal, arguing variously that Nancy Drew is a mythic hero , an expression of wish fulfillment, [ 12 ] or an embodiment of contradictory ideas about femininity . [ 13 ] Contents 1 Character 2 Creation of character 2.1 Ghostwriters 2.2 Legal disputes 3 Evolution of character 3.1 1930–1959 3.2 1959–1979 3.3 1980–2003 3.4 2003–2012 3.5 2013–present 4 Evolution of character's appearance 4.1 Russell H. Tandy 4.2 Bill Gillies and others 4.3 Rudy Nappi and others 4.4 Nancy in the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s 5 Books 5.1 International publications 6 Film and television 6.1 Films 6.2 Television 7 Video games 8 Merchandising 9 Cultural impact 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References 13 External links Character [ edit ] Nancy Drew is a fictional amateur sleuth. In the original versions of the series she was a 16-year-old high school graduate, and in later versions was rewritten and aged to be an 18-year-old high school graduate and detective. In the series, she lives in the fictional town of River Heights [ 14 ] with her father, attorney Carson Drew , and their housekeeper, Hannah Gruen. [ 15 ] As a child she lost her mother (at age 10 in the original versions; at age 3 in the later versions); this would reflect in her early independence (running a household since the age of ten with a clear-cut servant in early series; deferring to the servant as a surrogate parent in later ones). As a teenager she spends her time solving mysteries, some of which she stumbles upon and some of which begin as cases of her father's. Nancy is often assisted in solving mysteries by her two closest friends, Bess Marvin (who is delicate and feminine) and George Fayne (who is a tomboy), who are cousins, and also occasionally by her boyfriend Ned Nickerson , a student at Emerson College. Nancy has often been described as a supergirl: in the words of Bobbie Ann Mason , she is "as immaculate and self-possessed as a Miss America on tour. She is as cool as Mata Hari and as sweet as Betty Crocker ." [ 16 ] Nancy is well-off, attractive, and amazingly talented: At sixteen she had studied psychology in school, and was familiar with the power of suggestion and association.' Nancy was a fine painter, spoke French, and had frequently run motor boats. She was a skilled driver who at sixteen "flashed into the garage with a skill born of long practice". The prodigy was a sure-shot, an excellent swimmer, skillful oarsman, expert seamstress, gourmet cook, and a fine bridge player. Nancy brilliantly played tennis and golf, and rode like a cowboy. Nancy danced like Ginger Rogers and could administer first aid like the Mayo brothers. [ 17 ] Nancy never lacks money, and in later volumes of the series often travels to far-away locations, such as France in The Mystery of the 99 Steps (1966), Nairobi in The Spider Sapphire Mystery (1968), Austria in Captive Witness (1981), Japan in The Runaway Bride (1994), Costa Rica in Scarlet Macaw Scandal (2004), and Alaska in Curse of The Arctic Star (2013). Nancy is also able to travel freely about the United States, thanks in part to her car, which in the original books was a blue roadster, and in later books is a blue convertible . [ 18 ] Despite the trouble and presumed expense to which she goes to solve mysteries, Nancy never accepts monetary compensation; however, by implication, her expenses are often paid by a client of her father's, as part of the costs of solving one of his cases. [ 19 ] Creation of character [ edit ] Edward Stratemeyer conceived the character and wrote plot outlines but hired Mildred Wirt Benson to ghostwrite the first volumes in the series under the pseudonym Carolyn Keene . The character was conceived by Edward Stratemeyer , founder of the Stratemeyer Syndicate . Stratemeyer had created the Hardy Boys series in 1926 (although the first volumes were not published until 1927), which had been such a success that he decided on a similar series for girls, featuring an amateur girl detective as the heroine. While Stratemeyer believed that a woman's place was in the home, [ 20 ] he was aware that the Hardy Boys books were popular with girl readers and wished to capitalize on girls' interest in mysteries by offering a strong female heroine. [ 21 ] Stratemeyer initially pitched the new series to Hardy Boys publishers Grosset & Dunlap as the "Stella Strong Stories", adding that "they might also be called 'Diana Drew Stories', 'Diana Dare Stories', 'Nan Nelson Stories', 'Nan Drew Stories', or 'Helen Hale Stories'." [ 22 ] Editors at Grosset & Dunlap preferred "Nan Drew" of these options, but decided to lengthen "Nan" to "Nancy". [ 23 ] Stratemeyer accordingly began writing plot outlines and hired Mildred Wirt , later Mildred Wirt Benson, to ghostwrite the first volumes in the series under the pseudonym Carolyn Keene . [ 24 ] Subsequent titles have been written by a number of different ghostwriters, all under the pseudonym Carolyn Keene. The first four titles were published in 1930 and were an immediate success. Exact sales figures are not available for the years prior to 1979, but an indication of the books' popularity can be seen in a letter that Laura Harris, a Grosset and Dunlap editor, wrote to the Syndicate in 1931: "can you let us have the manuscript as soon as possible, and no later than July 10? There will only be three or four titles brought out then and the Nancy Drew is one of the most important." [ 25 ] The 6,000 copies that Macy's ordered for the 1933 Christmas season sold out within days. [ 26 ] In 1934 Fortune magazine featured the Syndicate in a cover story and singled Nancy Drew out for particular attention: "Nancy is the greatest phenomenon among all the fifty-centers. She is a best seller. How she crashed a Valhalla that had been rigidly restricted to the male of her species is a mystery even to her publishers." [ 27 ] Ghostwriters [ edit ] Consistent with other Stratemeyer Syndicate properties, the Nancy Drew novels were written by various writers, all under the pen name Carolyn Keene. [ 28 ] In accordance with the customs of Stratemeyer Syndicate series production, ghostwriters for the Syndicate signed contracts that have sometimes been interpreted as requiring authors to sign away all rights to authorship or future royalties. [ 29 ] Contracts stated that authors could not use their Stratemeyer Syndicate pseudonyms independently of the Syndicate. [ 30 ] In the early days of the Syndicate, ghostwriters were paid a fee of $125, "roughly equivalent to two month's wages for a typical newspaper reporter, the primary day job of the syndicate ghosts." [ 31 ] During the Great Depression this fee was lowered to $100 and eventually $75. [ 32 ] All royalties went to the Syndicate, and all correspondence with the publisher was handled through a Syndicate office. The Syndicate was able to enlist the cooperation of libraries in hiding the ghostwriters' names; when Walter Karig , who wrote volumes eight through ten of the original Nancy Drew Mystery Stories , tried to claim rights with the Library of Congress in 1933, the Syndicate instructed the Library of Congress not to reveal the names of any Nancy Drew authors, a move with which the Library of Congress complied. [ 33 ] The Syndicate's process for creating the Nancy Drew books consisted of creating a detailed plot outline, drafting a manuscript, and editing the manuscript. Edward Stratemeyer and his daughters Harriet Adams and Edna Stratemeyer Squier wrote most of the outlines for the original Nancy Drew series until 1979. Volume 30, The Clue of the Velvet Mask (1953), was outlined by Andrew Svenson . Usually, other writers wrote the manuscripts. Most of the early volumes were written by Mildred Wirt Benson . [ 34 ] Other volumes were written by Walter Karig , George Waller, Jr., Margaret Scherf, Wilhelmina Rankin, Alma Sasse, Charles S. Strong , Iris Vinton, [ 35 ] and Patricia Doll. Edward Stratemeyer edited the first three volumes, and Harriet Adams edited most subsequent volumes until her death in 1982. In 1959, the earlier titles were revised, largely by Adams. [ 36 ] From the late 1950s until her death in 1982, Harriet Adams herself wrote the manuscripts for most of the books. [ 37 ] After Adams's death, series production was overseen by Nancy Axelrad (who also wrote several volumes). The rights to the character were sold in 1984, along with the Stratemeyer Syndicate itself, to Simon & Schuster . Book packager Mega-Books subsequently hired authors to write the main Nancy Drew series and a new series, The Nancy Drew Files . [ 38 ] Legal disputes [ edit ] In 1980, Harriet Adams switched publishers to Simon & Schuster, dissatisfied with the lack of creative control at Grosset & Dunlap and the lack of publicity for the Hardy Boys' 50th anniversary in 1977. Grosset & Dunlap filed suit against the Syndicate and the new publishers, Simon & Schuster, citing "breach of contract, copyright infringement, and unfair competition." [ 39 ] Adams filed a countersuit, claiming the case was in poor taste and frivolous, and that, as author of the Nancy Drew series, she retained the rights to her work. Although Adams had written many of the titles after 1953, and edited others, she claimed to be the author of all of the early titles. In fact, she had rewritten the older titles and was not their original author. When Mildred Benson was called to testify about her work for the Syndicate, Benson's role in writing the manuscripts of early titles was revealed in court with extensive documentation, contradicting Adams' claims to authorship. The court ruled that Grosset had the rights to publish the original series as they were in print in 1980, but did not own characters or trademarks. Furthermore, any new publishers chosen by Adams were completely within their rights to print new titles. [ 40 ] Evolution of character [ edit ] See also: Category:Nancy Drew characters The character of Nancy Drew has gone through many permutations over the years. The Nancy Drew Mystery series was revised beginning in 1959; [ 41 ] with commentators agreeing that Nancy's character changed significantly from the original Nancy of the books written in the 1930s and 1940s. [ 42 ] Commentators also often see a difference between the Nancy Drew of the original series, the Nancy of The Nancy Drew Files , and the Nancy of Girl Detective series. [ 43 ] Nevertheless, some commentators find no significant difference between the different permutations of Nancy Drew, finding Nancy to be simply a good role model for girls. [ 44 ] Despite revisions, "[w]hat hasn't changed, however, are [Nancy's] basic values, her goals, her humility, and her magical gift for having at least nine lives. For more than six decades, her essence has remained intact." [ 45 ] Nancy is a "teen detective queen" who "offers girl readers something more than action-packed adventure: she gives them something original. Convention has it that girls are passive, respectful, and emotional, but with the energy of a girl shot out of a cannon, Nancy bends conventions and acts out every girl's fantasies of power. [ 46 ] Other commentators see Nancy as "a paradox—which may be why feminists can laud her as a formative 'girl power' icon and conservatives can love her well-scrubbed middle-class values." [ 47 ] 1930–1959 [ edit ] The earliest Nancy Drew books were published as dark blue hardcovers with the titles stamped in orange lettering with dark blue outlines and no other images on the cover. They went through several changes in early years: leaving the orange lettering with no outline and adding an orange silhouette of Nancy peering through a magnifying glass; then changing to a lighter blue board with dark blue lettering and silhouette; then changing the position of the title and silhouette on the front with black lettering and a more "modern" silhouette. Nancy Drew is depicted as an independent-minded 16-year-old who has already completed her high school education (16 was the minimum age for graduation at the time); the series also occurs over time, as she is 18 by the early 1940s. Apparently affluent (her father is a successful lawyer), she maintains an active social, volunteer, and sleuthing schedule, as well as participating in athletics and the arts, but is never shown as working for a living or acquiring job skills. Nancy is affected neither by the Great Depression—although many of the characters in her early cases need assistance as they are poverty-stricken—nor by World War II. Nancy lives with her lawyer father, Carson Drew, and their housekeeper, Mrs. Hannah Gruen. Some critics prefer the Nancy of these volumes, largely written by Mildred Benson. Benson is credited with "[breathing] ... a feisty spirit into Nancy's character." [ 48 ] The original Nancy Drew is sometimes claimed "to be a lot like [Benson] herself – confident, competent, and totally independent, quite unlike the cardboard character that [Edward] Stratemeyer had outlined." [ 49 ] This original Nancy is frequently outspoken and authoritative, so much so that Edward Stratemeyer told Benson that the character was "much too flip, and would never be well received." [ 50 ] [ 51 ] The editors at Grosset & Dunlap disagreed, [ 52 ] but Benson also faced criticism from her next Stratemeyer Syndicate editor, Harriet Adams, who felt that Benson should make Nancy's character more "sympathetic, kind-hearted and lovable." Adams repeatedly asked Benson to, in Benson's words, "make the sleuth less bold ... 'Nancy said' became 'Nancy said sweetly,' 'she said kindly,' and the like, all designed to produce a less abrasive more caring type of character." [ 53 ] Many readers and commentators, however, admire this original Nancy's outspoken character. [ 54 ] A prominent critic of the Nancy Drew character, at least the Nancy of these early Nancy Drew stories, [ 55 ] is mystery writer Bobbie Ann Mason . Mason contends that Nancy owes her popularity largely to "the appeal of her high-class advantages." [ 56 ] Mason also criticizes the series for its racism and classism , [ 57 ] arguing that Nancy is the upper-class WASP defender of a "fading aristocracy, threatened by the restless lower classes." [ 58 ] Mason further contends that the "most appealing elements of these daredevil girl sleuth adventure books are (secretly) of this kind: tea and fancy cakes, romantic settings, food eaten in quaint places (never a Ho-Jo's ), delicious pauses that refresh, old-fashioned picnics in the woods, precious jewels and heirlooms .... The word dainty is a subversive affirmation of a feminized universe." [ 59 ] At bottom, says Mason, the character of Nancy Drew is that of a girl who is able to be "perfect" because she is "free, white, and sixteen" [ 16 ] and whose "stories seem to satisfy two standards – adventure and domesticity. But adventure is the superstructure, domesticity the bedrock." [ 59 ] Others argue that "Nancy, despite her traditionally feminine attributes, such as good looks, a variety of clothes for all social occasions, and an awareness of good housekeeping, is often praised for her seemingly masculine traits ... she operates best independently, has the freedom and money to do as she pleases, and outside of a telephone call or two home, seems to live for solving mysteries rather than participating in family life." [ 60 ] 1959–1979 [ edit ] At the insistence of publishers Grosset & Dunlap, the Nancy Drew books were revised beginning in 1959, both to make the books more modern and to eliminate racist stereotypes. [ 61 ] Although Harriet Adams felt that these changes were unnecessary, she oversaw a complete overhaul of the series, as well as writing new volumes in keeping with the new guidelines laid down by Grosset & Dunlap. [ 2 ] The series did not so much eliminate racial stereotypes, however, as eliminate non-white characters altogether. [ 4 ] For example, in the original version of The Hidden Window Mystery (1956), Nancy visits friends in the south whose African-American servant, "lovable old Beulah ... serves squabs, sweet potatoes, corn pudding, piping hot biscuits, and strawberry shortcake." [ 62 ] The mistress of the house waits until Beulah has left the room and then says to Nancy, "I try to make things easier for Beulah but she insists on cooking and serving everything the old-fashioned way. I must confess, though, that I love it." [ 63 ] In the revised 1975 version, Beulah is changed to Anna, a "plump, smiling housekeeper". [ 64 ] Many other changes were relatively minor. The new books were bound in yellow with color illustrations on the front covers. Nancy's age was raised from 16 to 18, her mother was said to have died when Nancy was three, rather than ten, and other small changes were made. [ 48 ] Housekeeper Hannah Gruen, sent off to the kitchen in early stories, became less of a servant and more of a mother surrogate. [ 65 ] Many claim that Nancy's character also changed significantly: "The character of Nancy Drew also underwent a dramatic change: the strong-willed teen was having her personality diluted, causing her to lose her characteristic independence," making Nancy Drew more docile, conventional, and demure. [ 5 ] The books were also shortened from 25 chapters to 20, quickening the narrative pace. Some commentators are less concerned about the attempted elimination of racial stereotypes from these books than about the more choppy writing style: The revisions shortened the books and left out a lot of the prejudices and stereotypes from the original text volumes. They also quickened the pace of the texts. The originals really develop the story, the scenes, and the characters in much more detail than do the revised texts. Consequently, most collectors who grew up with the originals would not have the revised texts for anything! [ 48 ] Other critics see the Nancy of the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s as an improvement in some ways, a step back in others: "In these new editions, an array of elements had been modified ... and most of the more overt elements of racism had been excised. In an often overlooked alteration, however, the tomboyishness of the text's title character was also tamed." [ 66 ] Nancy becomes much more respectful of male authority figures in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, leading some to claim that the revised Nancy simply becomes too agreeable, and less distinctive, writing of her, "In the revised books, Nancy is relentlessly upbeat, puts up with her father's increasingly protective tendencies, and, when asked if she goes to church in the 1969 The Clue of the Tapping Heels , replies, 'As often as I can' ... Nancy learns to hold her tongue; she doesn't sass the dumb cops like she used to." [ 67 ] 1980–2003 [ edit ] In a change from earlier portrayals of the character, Nancy is pictured on the cover of Hit and Run Holiday (1986) in proximity to an attractive young man, rather than a clue. After Harriet Adams died in 1982, her protégé, Nancy Axelrad, oversaw production of the Nancy Drew books briefly before the Stratemeyer Syndicate was sold to Simon & Schuster. Simon & Schuster turned to book packager Mega-Books for new writers. [ 38 ] The books and Nancy's character began to change as a result, although there is disagreement on the nature of this change. Some contend that Nancy's character becomes "more like Mildred Wirt Benson's original heroine than any [version] since 1956." [ 68 ] Others criticize the series for its increasing incorporation of romance and "[dilution] of pre-feminist moxie ." [ 69 ] For example, volume 78 in the series Update on Crime (1992) opens with Nancy wondering in italics, " Am I or am I not in love with Ned Nickerson? " [ 70 ] Nancy begins dating other young men and acknowledges sexual desires: "'I saw [you kissing him] ... You don't have to apologize to me if some guy turns you on.' 'Gianni doesn't turn me on! ... Won't you please let me explain.'" [ 71 ] In 1986, the character of Nancy Drew was used in a new series, The Nancy Drew Files , which lasted until 1997. The Nancy of the Files series is also interested in romance and boys, a fact which led to much criticism of the series: "Millie [Mildred Wirt Benson] purists tend to look askance upon the Files series, in which fleeting pecks bestowed on Nancy by her longtime steady, Ned Nickerson, give way to lingering embraces in a Jacuzzi." [ 6 ] Cover art for Files titles, such as Hit and Run Holiday (1986), reflects these changes; Nancy is often dressed provocatively, in short skirts, shirts that reveal her stomach or breasts, or a bathing suit. She is often pictured with an attentive, handsome male in the background, and frequently appears aware of and interested in that male. Nancy also becomes more vulnerable, being often chloroformed into unconsciousness, or defenseless against chokeholds . The books place more emphasis on violence and character relationships. [ 72 ] Nancy Drew finally goes to college in the Nancy Drew on Campus series, which ran from 1995 to 1998. Again, the books focus on romance plots, and, by reader request, Nancy broke off her long-term relationship with boyfriend Ned Nickerson in the second volume of the series, On Her Own (1995). [ 48 ] [ 73 ] In 1997, Simon & Schuster announced a mass cancellation of Nancy Drew and Hardy Boys spin-offs except ones for younger children. 2003–2012 [ edit ] In 2003, publishers Simon & Schuster decided to end the original Nancy Drew series and feature Nancy's character in a new mystery series, Girl Detective . The Nancy Drew of the Girl Detective series drives a hybrid car, uses a mobile phone, and recounts her mysteries in the first person. Many applaud these changes, arguing that Nancy has not really changed at all other than learning to use a cell phone. [ 74 ] Others praise the series as more realistic; Nancy, these commentators argue, is now a less-perfect and therefore more likable being, one whom girls can more easily relate to – a better role model than the old Nancy because she can actually be emulated, rather than a "prissy automaton of perfection." [ 75 ] Some, mostly fans, vociferously lament the changes, seeing Nancy as a silly, air-headed girl whose trivial adventures (discovering who squished the zucchini in Without a Trace (2003)) "hold a shallow mirror to a pre-teen's world." [ 76 ] Leona Fisher argues that the new series portrays an increasingly white River Heights, partially because "the clumsy first-person narrative voice makes it nearly impossible to interlace external authorial attitudes into the discourse", while it continues and worsens "the implicitly xenophobic cultural representations of racial, ethnic, and linguistic others" by introducing gratuitous speculations on characters' national and ethnic origins. [ 77 ] The character is also the heroine of a series of graphic novels , begun in 2005 and produced by Papercutz. The graphic novels are written by Stefan Petrucha and illustrated in manga -style artwork by Sho Murase. The character's graphic novel incarnation has been described as "a fun, sassy, modern-day teen who is still hot on the heels of criminals." [ 78 ] The 2007 film was also tied into the books. A novelization of the movie was written to look like the older books. Two books were also written for the Girl Detective and Clue Crew series that deal with a mystery on a movie set. In 2008, the Girl Detective series was re-branded into trilogies and to have a model on the cover. The mysteries became deeper, with Nancy often making mistakes. These trilogies were also met with negative fan reception due to Nancy's constant mistakes, shortness of the books, and lack of action. With the new trilogy format, sales began slipping. Simon & Schuster then cut back from six to four books per year. In December 2011, they finally announced that the series was cancelled along with the Hardy Boys Undercover Brothers series. 2013–present [ edit ] With the sudden cancellation of the Girl Detective series, Simon & Schuster needed to find new Nancy Drew and Hardy Boys series. The Diaries series was brought to be the next series. This mixes both the Girl Detective series and original series. The series also was published with an illustrated cover, currently by Erin McGuire. The series publishes three books a year in January, May, and September. Evolution of character's appearance [ edit ] Nancy Drew has been illustrated by many artists over the years, and her look constantly updated. Both the Stratemeyer Syndicate and the books' publishers have exercised control over the way Nancy is depicted. [ 79 ] Jennifer Stowe contends that Nancy's portrayal devolves significantly over the years: The 1930s Nancy Drew is characterized as bold, capable and independent. She actively seeks out clues, and is shown in the center of the compositions. In subsequent characterizations Nancy Drew becomes progressively weaker, less in control. By the 1990s there is a complete reversal in the representation of her character. She is often shown being chased or threatened, the confidence of 1930s being replaced by fear. [ 80 ] Some aspects of Nancy's portrayal have remained relatively constant through the decades. Arguably her most characteristic physical depiction is that she is shown holding a flashlight. [ 81 ] Russell H. Tandy [ edit ] Commercial artist Russell H. Tandy was the first artist to illustrate Nancy Drew. Tandy was a fashion artist and infused Nancy with a contemporary fashion sensibility: her early style is that of a flatfoot flapper : heeled Mary Janes accompany her blue flapper skirt suit and cloche hat on three of the first four volume dust jackets. As styles changed over the next few years, Nancy began to appear in glamorous frocks, with immaculately set hair, pearls, matching hats, gloves, and handbags. [ 82 ] By the 1940s, Nancy wore simpler, tailored suits and outfits; her hair was often arranged in a pompadour . [ 83 ] In the post-war era, Tandy's Nancy is shown hatless, wearing casual skirt and blouse ensembles, and carrying a purse, like most teens of the late 1940s. [ 84 ] Tandy drew the inside sketches for the first 26 volumes of the series as well as painting the covers of the first 26 volumes with the exception of volume 11 – the cover artist for volume 11 is unknown. Tandy read each text before he began sketching, so his early covers were closely connected to specific scenes in the plots. He also hand-painted the cover lettering and designed the original Nancy Drew logo: a silhouette of Nancy bending slightly and looking at the ground through a quizzing glass . [ 84 ] Tandy often portrays Nancy Drew with confident, assertive body language. She never appears "shocked, trepidatious, or scared". [ 85 ] Nancy is shown either boldly in the center of the action or actively, but secretively, investigating a clue. [ 86 ] She is often observed by a menacing figure and appears to be in imminent danger, but her confident expression suggests to viewers that she is in control of the situation. [ 87 ] Tandy's home was struck by fire in 1962, and most of his original paintings and sketches were destroyed. As a result, the Tandy dust-jackets are considered very valuable by collectors. [ 88 ] Bill Gillies and others [ edit ] Beginning with Tandy in 1948 and continuing into the early 1950s, Nancy's appearance was updated to follow the current styles. In postwar opulence, a trend emerged for young adults to have their own casual style, instead of dressing in the same styles as more mature adults, and Nancy becomes less constrained. Sweater or blouse and skirt ensembles, as well as a pageboy hairstyle, were introduced in 1948, and continued with new artist Bill Gillies, who updated 10 covers and illustrated three new jackets from 1950 to 1952. Gillies used his wife for a model, and Nancy reflects the conservative 1950s, with immaculately waved hair and a limited wardrobe – she wears similar sweater, blouse, and skirt ensembles, in different combinations, on most of these covers. Gillies also designed the modern-era trademark as a spine symbol which was used for decades: Nancy's head in profile, looking through a quizzing glass. [ 88 ] In the later Tandy period (1946 – 1949) and continuing throughout the 1950s, Nancy is depicted less frequently in the center of the action. "The Ghost of Blackwood Hall" shows an assertive Nancy leading more timid friends up the front steps of the haunted house, and marks a transition to later illustrations. From 1949 forward, she is likely to be observing others, often hiding or concealing herself. [ 89 ] Her mouth is often open in surprise, and she hides her body from view. [ 90 ] However, although Nancy "expresses surprise, she is not afraid. She appears to be a bit taken aback by what she sees, but she looks as if she is still in control of the situation." [ 87 ] Many of these covers feature Nancy poised in the observation of a clue, spying on criminal activity, or displaying her discoveries to others involved in the mystery. Only occasionally is she shown in action, such as running from the scene of a fire, riding a horse, or actively sleuthing with a flashlight. At times she is only involved in action as her hiding place has been discovered by others. In most cases, more active scenes are used for the frontispiece, or in books after 1954, illustrations throughout the text drawn by uncredited illustrators. Rudy Nappi and others [ edit ] Joseph Rudolf "Rudy" Nappi, the artist from 1953 to 1979, illustrated a more average teenager. Nappi was asked by Grosset & Dunlap 's art director to update Nancy's appearance, especially her wardrobe. Nappi gave Nancy Peter Pan collars , shirtwaist dresses, a pageboy (later a flip) haircut, and the occasional pair of jeans. Nancy's hair color was changed from blonde to strawberry-blonde, reddish-blonde, or titian by the end of the decade. The change was long rumored to have been the result of a printing ink error, but was considered so favorable that it was adopted in the text for books published after 1959, and by illustrator Polly Bolian for volumes she created for a special book club in 1959–60. [ 91 ] A collector has displayed the original painting and Nappi apparently deliberately changed Nancy's hair to titian for a more colorful appearance. [ citation needed ] She appears in illustrations with her friend Bess, also a blonde, and George Fayne, who at the time had black hair. In 1962, all Grosset & Dunlap books become "picture covers", books with artwork and advertising printed directly on their covers, as opposed to books with a dust jacket over a tweed volume. The change was to reduce production costs. Several of the 1930s and 1940s cover illustrations were updated by Nappi for this change, depicting a Nancy of the Kennedy era, though the stories themselves were not updated. Internal illustrations, which were dropped in 1937, were returned to the books beginning in 1954, as pen and ink line drawings, mostly by uncredited artists, but usually corresponding with Nappi's style of drawing Nancy on the covers. [ 48 ] Nappi followed trends initiated by Gillies and often illustrated Nancy wearing the same clothing more than once, including a mustard shirtwaist dress. Unlike Tandy, Nappi did not read the books before illustrating them; instead, his wife read them and provided him with a brief plot summary before Nappi began painting. [ 92 ] Nappi's first cover was for The Clue of the Velvet Mask , where he began a trend of portraying Nancy as "bobby-soxer ... a contemporary sixteen-year-old. This Nancy was perky, clean-cut, and extremely animated. In the majority of his covers Nancy looks startled – which, no doubt, she was." [ 93 ] Nancy's style is considerably conservative, and remains so during the psychedelic period. Although she wears bold colors and prints, or the background colors are shades of electric yellow, shocking pink, turquoise, or apple green, her clothing is high-necked and with long hemlines. Earlier Nappi covers show Nancy in poses similar to those in the covers by Tandy and Gillies; for many updated covers he simply updated the color scheme, clothing style, and hairstyles of the characters but retains their original poses in similar settings. Later Nappi covers show only Nancy's head or part of her body, surrounded by spooky or startling elements or clues from the story. These Nappi covers would later be used for the opening credits of the television production, with photos of Pamela Sue Martin inserted on the book covers. Often, "Nancy's face wears the blank expression of one lost in thought," [ 94 ] making her appear passive. [ 95 ] On the cover of The Strange Message in the Parchment (1977), for example, in contrast to earlier covers, Nancy "is not shown in the midst of danger or even watching a mystery unfold from a distance. Instead, Nancy is shown thinking about the clues"; [ 96 ] in general, Nancy becomes less confident and more puzzled. [ 94 ] Nappi died March 13, 2015, in Charlotte, NC, where he lived with his wife Peggy. Nappi often used family members as models for his work. [ citation needed ] His eldest daughter was the model for most of the Nancy Drew illustrations. [ citation needed ] A few of his nieces and nephews were models for many of his other book cover illustrations, including his nephew Tommy for many of his Hardy Boys illustrations. [ citation needed ] Nancy in the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s [ edit ] See also: Girl Detective Nancy is shown in danger on the cover of The Case of the Vanishing Veil (1980) and other covers from the 1980s. Unlike in earlier covers from the series, she is not completely in control of the situation. Ruth Sanderson and Paul Frame provided cover art and interior illustrations for the first Nancy Drew paperbacks, published under the Wanderer imprint. Other artists, including Aleta Jenks and others whose names are unknown, [ 97 ] provided cover art, but no interior illustrations, for later paperbacks. Nancy is portrayed as "a wealthy, privileged sleuth who looks pretty and alert.... The colors, and Nancy's facial features, are often so vivid that some of the covers look more like glossy photographs than paintings." [ 98 ] Nancy is frequently portrayed pursuing a suspect, [ 95 ] examining a clue, or observing action. She is often also shown in peril: [ 99 ] being chased, falling off a boat, or hanging by a rope from rafters. These covers are "characterized by frenetic energy on Nancy's part; whether she is falling, limbs flailing, an alarmed look on her face, or whether she is running, hair flying, body bent, face breathless. Nancy does not have any control over the events that are happening in these covers. She is shown to be a victim, being hunted and attacked by unseen foes." [ 100 ] Nancy is also sometimes pursued by a visibly threatening foe, as on the cover of The Case of the Vanishing Veil (1988). The covers of the The Nancy Drew Files and Girl Detective series represent further departures from the bold, confident character portrayed by Tandy. The Nancy portrayed on the covers of The Nancy Drew Files is "a markedly sexy Nancy, with a handsome young man always lurking in the background. Her clothes often reveal an ample bustline and her expression is mischievous." [ 98 ] In the Girl Detective series, Nancy's face is depicted on each cover in fragments. Her eyes, for example, are confined to a strip across the top of the cover while her mouth is located near the spine in a box independent of her eyes. The artwork for Nancy's eyes and mouth is taken from Rudy Nappi's cover art for the revised version of The Secret of the Old Clock . [ 48 ] Books [ edit ] Main article: List of Nancy Drew books The longest-running series of books to feature Nancy Drew is the original Nancy Drew series, whose 175 volumes were published from 1930 to 2003. Nancy also appeared in 124 titles in The Nancy Drew Files and is currently the heroine of the Diaries series. Various other series feature the character, such as the Nancy Drew Notebooks and Nancy Drew on Campus . While Nancy Drew is the central character in each series, continuity is preserved only within one series, not between them all; for example, in concurrently published titles in the Nancy Drew series and the Nancy Drew on Campus series, Nancy is respectively dating her boyfriend Ned Nickerson or broken up with Ned Nickerson. International publications [ edit ] The main Nancy Drew series, The Nancy Drew Files , and Girl Detective books have been translated into a number of languages besides English. Estimates vary from between 14 and 25 languages, [ 101 ] but 25 seems the most accurate number. [ 102 ] Nancy Drew books have been published in many European countries (especially in Nordic countries and France) as well as in Latin America and Asia. The character of Nancy Drew seems to be more popular in some countries than others. Nancy Drew books have been in print in Norway since 1941 (the first country outside USA [ 103 ] ), in Denmark since 1958, in France since 1955 [ 104 ] and in Italy since 1970 by Arnoldo Mondadori Editore . Other countries, such as Estonia , have only recently begun printing Nancy Drew books. [ 102 ] Nancy's name is often changed in translated editions: in France, she is known as Alice Roy; in Sweden, as Kitty Drew; in Finland, as Paula Drew; [ 102 ] and in Norway the book series has the name of Frøken Detektiv ( Miss Detective ), though the heroine's name is still Nancy Drew inside the books. [ 105 ] In Germany, Nancy is a German law student named Susanne Langen. George Fayne 's name is even more frequently changed, to Georgia, Joyce, Kitty, or Marion. Cover art and series order is often changed as well, and in many countries only a limited number of Drew books are available in translation. Film and television [ edit ] Five feature films and three television shows featuring Nancy Drew have been produced to date. No television show featuring Nancy Drew has lasted longer than two years, and film portrayals of the character have met with mixed reviews. Films [ edit ] Former child actress Bonita Granville portrayed Nancy Drew in four Warner Bros. films directed by William Clemens in the late 1930s: Nancy Drew... Detective (loosely based on The Password to Larkspur Lane ) (December 1938), Nancy Drew... Reporter (March 1939), Nancy Drew: Trouble Shooter (September 1939), and Nancy Drew and the Hidden Staircase (November 1939). [ 106 ] A fifth movie may have been planned or even produced, but it was never released; actor Frankie Thomas believes that he and Granville made five films, not four, [ 107 ] and in August 1939 Harriet Adams wrote to Mildred Benson , "three have been shown in this area, and I have just heard that a fifth is in production." [ 108 ] The films were in part based on the Torchy Blane film series with Glenda Farrell and Barton MacLane , also made by Warner Bros. Nancy & Torchy have very similar hair styles, almost always wear a hat, were told to stay off the case (but were stubborn and continued to sleuth), were assisted by their boyfriends. Nancy Drew and the Hidden Staircase was the only film to borrow its title from a book in the series, although the plot was altered substantially. One critic wrote that "the only similarity between the book and the film was the word staircase." [ 109 ] Nancy's boyfriend Ned Nickerson became Ted Nickerson, as Ned was considered too old-fashioned, [ 106 ] and housekeeper Hannah Gruen was replaced by Effie Schneider, a minor character who had appeared in only a few books as the Drews' part-time maid; in the films, Effie's traits are combined with Hannah's. Nancy's friends George and Bess were eliminated completely, "mystery elements were downplayed, plots simplified, and the romance spiced up." [ 108 ] To promote the film, Warner Bros. created a Nancy Drew fan club that included a set of rules, such as: "Must have steady boy friend, in the sense of a 'pal'" and must "Take part in choosing own clothes." [ 110 ] These rules were based on some research Warner Bros. had done on the habits and attitudes of "typical" teenage girls. [ 111 ] Critical reaction to these films is mixed. Some find that the movies did not "depict the true Nancy Drew", [ 112 ] in part because Granville's Nancy "blatantly used her feminine wiles (and enticing bribes)" to accomplish her goals. [ 113 ] The films also portray Nancy as childish and easily flustered, a significant change from her portrayal in the books. [ 114 ] Nevertheless, Mildred Benson , the author of most Nancy Drew books at the time, liked the films. [ 108 ] A film adaptation of Nancy Drew was released on June 15, 2007 by Warner Bros. Pictures , with Emma Roberts as Nancy Drew, Max Thieriot as Ned Nickerson and Tate Donovan as Carson Drew. As with the earlier Drew films, reactions were mixed. Some see the film as updated version of the basic character: "although it has been glammed up for the lucrative tween demographic, the movie retains the best parts of the books, including, of course, their intelligent main character." [ 115 ] Others find the movie "jolting" because Nancy's "new classmates prefer shopping to sleuthing, and Nancy's plaid skirt and magnifying glass make her something of a dork, not the town hero she was in the Midwest." [ 116 ] Television [ edit ] In 1957, Desilu and CBS created a pilot, Nancy Drew , based on the movies from the 1930s. Roberta Shore was in the title role as Nancy Drew, with Tim Considine as Ned Nickerson, and Frankie Thomas, Jr. as Carson Drew. The project was cancelled when Harriett Adams, who disliked the portrayal of the character, expressed her disapproval and the series never aired. [ 117 ] A television series called The Hardy Boys/Nancy Drew Mysteries ran from 1977 to 1979 on ABC . [ 118 ] It initially starred 24-year-old Pamela Sue Martin as Nancy. For the first season, episodes featuring Nancy alternated with episodes featuring the Hardy Boys. The stories were new stories based on the original stories, with Nancy solving mysteries with her friends George and Ned. Beginning in the second season, the format of the series changed to focus more on the Hardy Boys, with Nancy Drew primarily appearing as a guest star in several crossover story lines; Martin left the series midway through the second season and was replaced by Janet Louise Johnson for the final few episodes. [ 119 ] The series continued for a third season as The Hardy Boys Mysteries , dropping Nancy Drew completely. The series was cancelled mid-way through the third season. In 1989, Canadian production company Nelvana began filming for a Nancy Drew television series called Nancy Drew and Daughter . Margot Kidder was cast as an adult Nancy Drew and her daughter as Nancy's daughter. Kidder was injured during filming of the first episode when the brakes failed on the car she was driving, and production was canceled. [ 120 ] Nelvana began production of another Nancy Drew television show in 1995. Tracy Ryan starred as Nancy Drew, with Jhene Erwin as Bess Marvin, Joy Tanner as George Fayne, and, in a recurring role, Scott Speedman as Ned Nickerson. The show was cancelled midway through its first season due to low ratings. [ 121 ] The entire series has since been released on DVD. On December 15, 2002, ABC aired Nancy Drew , with Maggie Lawson in the title role, as part of The Wonderful World of Disney series. The movie was intended to be a pilot for a possible weekly series. Additional scripts were ordered, but a series was not forthcoming. [ 122 ] On October 5, 2015, CBS announced that it would be developing a new series. [ 123 ] In January, 2016, they announced that the pilot would feature Nancy as a non-Caucasian New York City police detective in her thirties. [ 124 ] In February, 2016, Anthony Edwards is set to play Carson in the series. [ 125 ] Video games [ edit ] Main article: List of Nancy Drew video games Computer games publisher Her Interactive began publishing Nancy Drew computer games in 1998. Some titles are taken from published Nancy Drew books, such as The Secret of the Old Clock ; others are not. The games are targeted at teens "ages 10 and up" and are rated "E" ("Everyone") by the ESRB . They follow the popular adventure game style of play. Players must move Nancy around in a virtual environment to talk to suspects, pick up clues, solve puzzles, and eventually solve the crime. [ 126 ] Lani Minella has voiced the Nancy character since the first game in 1998 up to the most recent game, Sea of Darkness , the 32nd game. The 33rd game, Midnight in Salem , which will be coming out in 2016, will be voiced by a new actress. Minella, who has voiced Nancy for 17 years, will be stepping down from the role. Her Interactive said that the community has been nothing but supportive of Minella, and that their overall goal is to keep creating noteworthy games. [ 127 ] In addition to the games created by Her Interactive, a game for the Nintendo DS was released in September 2007 by Majesco Entertainment . In the game, developed by Gorilla Systems Co and called Nancy Drew: Deadly Secret of Olde World Park , players help Nancy solve the mystery of a missing billionaire. [ 128 ] [ 129 ] Majesco has also released two other Nancy Drew games for the DS, entitled Nancy Drew: The Mystery of the Clue Bender Society (released July 2008) [ 130 ] and Nancy Drew: The Hidden Staircase , based on the second book in the original Nancy Drew Mystery Stories series (released September 2008). [ 131 ] Nancy Drew: The Hidden Staircase and Nancy Drew: The Model Mysteries , both by THQ, are also available on the Nintendo DS system. Some games, like Secrets Can Kill , Shadow at the Water's Edge , and The Captive Curse , are rated "E10+". The games have received recognition for promoting female interest in video games. [ 132 ] Her Interactive has also released several versions of their Nancy Drew games in French, as part of a series called Les Enquêtes de Nancy Drew, [ 102 ] and shorter games as part of a new series called the Nancy Drew Dossier. [ 133 ] The first title, Lights, Camera, Curses , was released in 2008 and the second, Resorting to Danger , was released in 2009. While most of the games are computer games, with most available only on PC and some newer titles also available on Mac, Her Interactive also have released some of the titles on other platforms, like DVD and Nintendo Wii system. Merchandising [ edit ] A number of Nancy Drew products have been licensed over the years, primarily in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s. Parker Brothers produced a "Nancy Drew Mystery Game" in 1957 with the approval of the Stratemeyer Syndicate . In 1967 Madame Alexander produced a Nancy Drew doll. The doll carried binoculars and camera and was available in two outfits: with a plaid coat or a dress and short jacket. Harriet Adams disapproved of the doll's design, believing Nancy's face to be too childish, but the doll was marketed nonetheless. Various Nancy Drew coloring, activity, and puzzle books have also been published, as has a Nancy Drew puzzle. A Nancy Drew Halloween costume and a Nancy Drew lunchbox were produced in the 1970s as television show tie-ins. [ 134 ] Cultural impact [ edit ] According to commentators, the cultural impact of Nancy Drew has been enormous. [ 135 ] The immediate success of the series led directly to the creation of numerous other girls' mysteries series, such as The Dana Girls mystery stories and the Kay Tracey mystery stories, [ 136 ] and the phenomenal sales of the character Edward Stratemeyer feared was "too flip" encouraged publishers to market many other girls' mystery series, such as the Judy Bolton Series , and to request authors of series such as the Cherry Ames Nurse Stories to incorporate mystery elements into their works. [ 137 ] Many prominent and successful women cite Nancy Drew as an early formative influence whose character encouraged them to take on unconventional roles, including Supreme Court Justices Sandra Day O'Connor , Ruth Bader Ginsburg , and Sonia Sotomayor ; [ 138 ] TV personalities Oprah Winfrey and Barbara Walters ; singers Barbra Streisand and Beverly Sills ; [ 139 ] mystery authors Sara Paretsky and Nancy Pickard ; scholar Carolyn Heilbrun ; actresses Ellen Barkin and Emma Roberts ; [ 140 ] former Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton ; former First Lady Laura Bush ; [ 10 ] and former president of the National Organization for Women Karen DeCrow . [ 141 ] Less prominent women also credit the character of Nancy Drew with helping them to become stronger women; when the first Nancy Drew conference was held, at the University of Iowa , in 1993, conference organizers received a flood of calls from women who "all had stories to tell about how instrumental Nancy had been in their lives, and about how she had inspired, comforted, entertained them through their childhoods, and, for a surprising number of women, well into adulthood." [ 142 ] Nancy Drew's popularity continues unabated: in 2002, the first Nancy Drew book published, The Secret of the Old Clock , alone sold 150,000 copies, [ 143 ] good enough for top-50 ranking in children's books, [ 144 ] and other books in the series sold over 100,000 copies each. [ 145 ] Sales of the hardcover volumes of the original Nancy Drew series alone has surpassed sales of Agatha Christie titles, [ 146 ] and newer titles in the Girl Detective series have reached The New York Times bestseller lists. [ 143 ] Entertainment Weekly ranked her seventeenth on its list of "The Top 20 Heroes" ahead of Batman , explaining that Drew is the "first female hero embraced by most little girls ... [Nancy lives] in an endless summer of never-ending adventures and unlimited potential." The magazine goes on to cite Scooby-Doo ' s Velma Dinkley as well as Veronica Mars as Nancy Drew's "copycat descendants". [ 81 ] Many feminist critics have pondered the reason for the character's iconic status. Nancy's car, and her skill in driving and repairing it, are often cited. Melanie Rehak points to Nancy's famous blue roadster (now a blue hybrid ) as a symbol of "ultimate freedom and independence." [ 139 ] Not only does Nancy have the freedom to go where she pleases (a freedom other, similar characters such as The Dana Girls do not have), but she is also able to change a tire and fix a flawed distributor, prompting Paretsky to argue that in "a nation where car mechanics still mock or brush off complaints by women Nancy remains a significant role model." [ 147 ] Nancy is also treated with respect: her decisions are rarely questioned and she is trusted by those around her. Male authority figures believe her statements, and neither her father nor Hannah Gruen, the motherly housekeeper, "place ... restrictions on her comings and goings." [ 148 ] Nancy's father not only imposes no restrictions on his daughter, but trusts her both with her own car and his gun (in the original version of The Hidden Staircase [1930]), asks her advice on a frequent basis, and accedes to all her requests. Some critics, such as Betsy Caprio and Ilana Nash, argue that Nancy's relationship with her continually approving father is satisfying to girl readers because it allows them to vicariously experience a fulfilled Electra complex . [ 149 ] Unlike other girl detectives, Nancy does not go to school (for reasons that are never explained, but assuming because she has finished), and she thus has complete autonomy. Similar characters, such as Kay Tracey , do go to school, and not only lose a degree of independence but also of authority. The fact of a character's being a school-girl reminds "the reader, however fleetingly, of the prosaic realities of high-school existence, which rarely includes high adventures or an authoritative voice in the world of adults." [ 150 ] Some see in Nancy's adventures a mythic quality. Nancy often explores secret passages, prompting Nancy Pickard to argue that Nancy Drew is a figure equivalent to the ancient Sumerian deity Inanna and that Nancy's "journeys into the 'underground'" are, in psychological terms, explorations of the unconscious. [ 151 ] Nancy is a heroic figure, undertaking her adventures not for the sake of adventure alone, but in order to help others, particularly the disadvantaged. For this reason, Nancy Drew has been called the modern embodiment of the character of "Good Deeds" in Everyman . [ 152 ] In the end, many critics [ 153 ] agree that at least part of Nancy Drew's popularity depends on the way in which the books and the character combine sometimes contradictory values, with Kathleen Chamberlain writing in The Secrets of Nancy Drew : "For over 60 years, the Nancy Drew series has told readers that they can have the benefits of both dependence and independence without the drawbacks, that they can help the disadvantaged and remain successful capitalists, that they can be both elitist and democratic, that they can be both child and adult, and that they can be both 'liberated' women and Daddy's little girls." [ 154 ] As another critic puts it, "Nancy Drew 'solved' the contradiction of competing discourses about American womanhood by entertaining them all." [ 155 ] In 2010, Nancy Drew (and her novels) were discussed in the Young Adult themed issue of the academic journal Studies in the Novel . See Jennifer M. Woolston's essay entitled "Nancy Drew's Body: The Case of the Autonomous Female Sleuth" for a detailed discussion of the heroine's impact on popular culture. The essay also discusses links to Nancy Drew and feminist theory. See also [ edit ] Fictional characters portal Books portal United States portal The Hardy Boys Notes [ edit ] ^ Peters (2007), 542. ^ a b Rehak (2006), 243. ^ Nash (2006), 55. ^ a b Rehak (2006), 248. ^ a b Lapin (1989). ^ a b Leigh Brown (1993), 1D. ^ Stowe (1999). ^ Inness (1997), 79. ^ McFeatters (2005), 36. ^ a b Burrell (2007). ^ Argetsinger and Roberts (2007), C03. ^ Sherrie A. Inness writes that in "many respects, Nancy Drew exists as a wish fulfillment." See Inness (1997), 175. ^ Chamberlain (1994). ^ Fisher (2004), 71. ^ Macleod (1995), 31. ^ a b Mason (1995), 50. ^ Jones (1973), 708. ^ Inness (1997), 91. ^ Keene (1961), 198. ^ Johnson (1982), xxvi. ^ Johnson (1993), 12. ^ Rehak (2006), 113–114. ^ Rehak (2006), 113. ^ Carpan (2008), 50. ^ Quoted in Rehak (2006), 121. ^ Kismaric and Heiferman (2007), 27. ^ Quoted in Plunkett-Powell (1993), 18. ^ Andrews, Dale (2013-08-27). "The Hardy Boys Mystery" . Children's books . Washington: SleuthSayers. ^ Plunkett-Powell (1993), 24. ^ Keeline (2008), 21. ^ Keeline (2008), 22. ^ Rehak (2006), 149. ^ Plunkett-Powell (1993), 26–27. ^ "Mildred Augustine Wirt Benson Papers" . Iowa Women's Archives . University of Iowa Libraries . Retrieved 27 February 2013 . ^ Plunkett-Powell (1993), 39. ^ Rehak (2006), 245. ^ Farah (2005), 431–521; Rehak (2006), 249. ^ a b Plunkett-Powell (1993), 29. ^ Johnson (1993), 16. ^ Johnson (1993), 17. ^ Dyer and Romalov (1995), 194. ^ See, for example, Betsy Caprio, Geoffrey Lapin, Karen Plunkett-Powell, and Melanie Rehak. ^ See, for example, Maureen Corrigan , Catherine Foster. ^ See, for example, Gerstel (2007), Kismaric and Heiferman (2007), and Plunkett-Powell (1993). ^ Plunkett-Powell (1993), 55. ^ Kismaric and Heiferman (2007), 8. ^ O'Rourke (2004). ^ a b c d e f Fisher, "Nancy Drew, Sleuth." ^ Kismaric and Heiferman (2007), 24. ^ Quoted in Plunkett-Powell (1993), 33. ^ While Benson stated repeatedly in interviews that Stratemeyer used these words to her (Keeline 25), James Keeline states that there is no independent confirmation of this; Stratemeyer's written comments to Benson upon receipt of the manuscript for The Secret of the Old Clock contain no such criticism (Keeline 26). ^ Plunkett-Powell (1993), 33. ^ Quoted in Kismaric and Heiferman (2007), 28. ^ See, for example, Kismaric and Heiferman (2007), Lapin (1986), and Fisher. ^ while Mason's book was originally published in 1975, after the Drew books began to be revised and re-written, Mason cites the unrevised volumes almost exclusively. ^ Mason (1995), 49. ^ Mason (1995), 69–71. ^ Mason (1995), 73. ^ a b Mason (1995), 60. ^ Parry (1997), 148. ^ Carpan (2008), 15. ^ Mason (1995), 70. ^ Keene (1956), 64. Quoted in Mason (1995), 70. ^ Keene (1975), 35. ^ Kismaric and Heiferman (2007), 94. ^ Abate (2008), 167. ^ Kismaric and Heiferman (2007), 113–114. ^ Caprio (1992), 27. ^ Torrance (2007), D01. ^ Keene (1985), 1. ^ Keene (1985), 111–112. Cited by Shangraw Fox. ^ Foster (1986), 31. ^ Drew (1997), 185. ^ Springen and Meadows(2005). ^ Benfer (2004), A15. ^ Corrigan (2004). ^ Fisher, Leona (2008), 73. ^ "Sleuths Go Graphic" (2008). ^ Rehak (2006), 228. ^ Stowe (1999), 1. ^ a b "The Top 20 Heroes," Entertainment Weekly 1041 (April 3, 2009): 36. ^ Stowe (1999), 15. ^ Plunkett-Powell (1993), 44. ^ a b Plunkett-Powell (1993), 43–44. ^ Stowe (1999), 26. ^ Stowe (1999), 28. ^ a b Stowe (1999), 32. ^ a b Plunkett-Powell (1993), 46. ^ Stowe (1999), 30. ^ Stowe (1999), 30–31. ^ Plunkett-Powell (1993), 48. ^ Plunkett-Powell (1993), 49. ^ Plunkett-Powell (1993), 47. ^ a b Stowe (1999), 35. ^ a b Stowe (1999), 36. ^ Stowe (1999), 33. ^ Plunkett-Powell (1993), 52. ^ a b Plunkett-Powell (1993), 51. ^ Stowe (1999), 38. ^ Stowe (1999), 40. ^ Plunkett-Powell (1993), 160. ^ a b c d Shangraw Fox. ^ "Around the World with Nancy Drew – Norway" . Nancydrewworld.com. December 21, 2001 . Retrieved September 23, 2012 . ^ (French) Nancy Drew in France ^ Skjønsberg (1994), 72. ^ a b Plunkett-Powell (1993), 113. ^ Plunkett-Powell (1993), 117. ^ a b c Kismaric and Heiferman (2007), 103. ^ Kismaric and Heiferman (2007), 105. ^ Kismaric and Heiferman (2007), 116. ^ Nash (2006), 87–90. ^ Plunkett-Powell (1993), 114. ^ Plunkett-Powell (1993), 115. ^ Nash (2006), 71–116. ^ Cheong (2007). ^ Brown (2007), D1. ^ Encyclopedia of Television Pilots, 1937–2012 – Vincent Terrace – Google Books . Books.google.com. 2013-02-26 . Retrieved 2014-07-16 . ^ Carpan (2008), 110. ^ Plunkett-Powell (1993), 121. ^ Canadian Press (1990). ^ Kismaric and Heiferman (2007), 122. ^ Harris, Beth (December 13, 2002). "No mystery: Actress detects similarity with Nancy Drew" . Associated Press. ^ Goldberg, Lesley (October 5, 2015). " ' Nancy Drew' TV Series In the Works at CBS" . The Hollywood Reporter . ^ http://variety.com/2016/tv/news/cbs-nancy-drew-diverse-pilot-order-1201683223/ ^ Andreeva, Nellie (February 24, 2016). "‘Drew’: Anthony Edwards To Co-Star In CBS’ Nancy Drew Pilot" . Retrieved February 24, 2016 . ^ Szadkowski (2009). ^ "JANUARY LETTER FROM HER INTERACTIVE – Her Interactive" . Her Interactive . Retrieved 2015-10-21 . ^ TurboNuts (2007). ^ Musser (2007). ^ Szadkowski (2008). ^ Brown (2009). ^ "Games of the Year". PC Gamer (Future Games) (198): 65. March 2010. ^ Bella (2009). ^ Plunkett-Powell (1993), 158–167. ^ Among critics making this claim are Billman, Caprio, Dyer and Romalov, Inness, Kismaric and Heiferman, Macleod, Mason, Nash, Plunkett-Powell, and Rehak. ^ Rehak (2006), 162. ^ Billman (1986), 8. ^ Weiss (2009). ^ a b Shulman (2007). ^ http://www.nancydrewsleuth.com/PRESSKIT-Factoids2.pdf ^ Rehak (2006), xii. ^ Nancy Tillman Romalov, quoted in Knowlton (1995), 21. ^ a b Eveld (2004). ^ Strauss (2004). ^ Leibrock (2004). ^ Paretsky (1991), i. ^ Paretsky (1991), ii. ^ Paretsky (1991), iii. ^ Caprio (1992); Nash (2006), passim. ^ Macleod (1995), 33. ^ Pickard (1991), iii. ^ Lundin (2003), 123. ^ See also Mason (1995), 49; Nash (2006), 29–30; O'Rourke (2004). ^ Chamberlain (1994), 3. ^ Siegel (1997), 171. References [ edit ] Abate, Michelle Ann (2008). Tomboys: A Literary and Cultural History . Temple University Press. ISBN 1-59213-723-7 . Argetsinger, Amy; Roxanne Roberts (May 30, 2007). "Laura Bush and the Case of the Celebrity Non-Endorsement" . The Washington Post . Retrieved March 31, 2009 . Bella, Laurie (March 18, 2009). "Her Interactive Unveils New Website Design for Nancy Drew Game Fans Worldwide" . Reuters . Retrieved April 7, 2009 . Benfer, Amy (March 6, 2004). "Girl, Revised". The New York Times . pp. A: 15. Billman, Carol (1986). The Secret of the Stratemeyer Syndicate . Ungar. ISBN 0-8044-2055-6 . Brown, Christopher (2009). "Nancy Drew: The Hidden Staircase" . AllGame . Retrieved April 6, 2009 . Brown, Robbie (June 16, 2007). "It's a mystery to some – Nancy Drew devotees debate new film's modern setting". The Boston Globe . pp. D1. Burrell, Jackie (June 15, 2007). "Times change, but Nancy Drew has lost none of her appeal" . Contra Costa Times . Retrieved March 18, 2009 . Canadian Press (November 30, 1990). "Kidder to sue production company". Globe and Mail (Canada) . Caprio, Betsy (1992). The Mystery of Nancy Drew: Girl Sleuth on the Couch . Source Publications. ISBN 0-940147-23-8 . Carpan, Carolyn (2008). Sisters, Schoolgirls, and Sleuths . Rowman and Littlefield. ISBN 0-8108-5756-1 . Chamberlain, Kathleen (June 1994). "The Secrets of Nancy Drew: Having Their Cake and Eating It Too" . The Lion and the Unicorn (ProjectMuse) 18 (1): 1–12. doi : 10.1353/uni.0.0328 . Retrieved October 29, 2010 . Cheong, June (June 20, 2007). "The Draw of Nancy Drew". The Straights Times (Singapore) . Clapp-Itnyre, Alisa (2005). Darwin L. Henderson and Jill P. May, eds. "The Power of Women, the Power of Teens: Revisioning Gender and Age in the Nancy Drew and Hardy Boys Mystery Series". Exploring Culturally Diverse Literature for Children and Adolescents: Learning to Listen in New Ways (Pearson and Allyn): 286–299. Corrigan, Maureen (March 30, 2004). "Nancy Drew, Updated" . Fresh Air . National Public Radio. Drew, Bernard Alger (1997). The 100 most popular young adult authors: biographical sketches and bibliographies . Libraries Unlimited. ISBN 1-56308-615-8 . Dyer, Carolyn Stewart; Nancy Tillman Romalov (1995). Rediscovering Nancy Drew . University of Iowa Press. ISBN 0-87745-501-5 . Eveld, Edward (March 30, 2004). "The Clue of the New Drew". The Kansas City Star . Farah, David (2005). Farah's Guide . David Farah; 12th edition. Finnan, Robert (2013). "Unofficial Nancy Drew Home Page" . Retrieved January 27, 2014 . Fisher, Jennifer (2004). Nutcracker Nation: How an Old World Ballet Became a Christmas Tradition in the New World . Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-10599-1 . Fisher, Jennifer. "Nancy Drew Sleuth" . Retrieved March 15, 2009 . Fisher, Leona W (2008). Cornelius, Michael G; Gregg, Melanie E, eds. "Race and Xenophobia in the Nancy Drew Novels" in Nancy Drew and Her Sister Sleuths . McFarland & Company. ISBN 978-0-7864-3995-9 . Foster, Catherine (September 11, 1986). "Slick new image for good old Nancy Drew". The Christian Science Monitor . p. 31. Gerstel, Judy (June 11, 2007). "The Secret of the Spunky Sleuth's Success". Toronto Star . pp. L01. Inness, Sherrie (1997). The Lesbian Menace . University of Massachusetts Press. ISBN 1-55849-091-4 . Johnson, Deidre (1993). Edward Stratemeyer and the Stratemeyer Syndicate . Twayne. ISBN 0-8057-4006-6 . —— (1982). Stratemeyer Pseudonyms and Series Books . Greenwood Press. ISBN 0-313-22632-6 . Jones, James (1973). "Nancy Drew, WASP Supergirl of 1930s". Journal of Popular Culture 6 (4): 707–717. doi : 10.1111/j.0022-3840.1973.00707.x . Keeline, James D (2008). Cornelius, Michael G; Gregg, Melanie E, eds. "The Nancy Drew Mythtery Stories" in Nancy Drew and Her Sister Sleuths . McFarland & Company. ISBN 978-0-7864-3995-9 . Keene, Carolyn (1956). The Hidden Window Mystery (First ed.). Grosset & Dunlap. —— (1961). The mystery at Lilac Inn (First ed.). Grosset & Dunlap. —— (1975). The Hidden Window Mystery (Revised ed.). Grosset & Dunlap. ISBN 0-448-09534-3 . —— (1985). The Phantom of Venice . Aladdin. ISBN 0-671-73422-9 . Kismaric, Carole; Marvin Heiferman (2007). The Mysterious Case of Nancy Drew and the Hardy Boys . Fireside. ISBN 1-4165-4945-5 . Knowlton, Eloise (Spring 1995). "Unknowns Made Known: Nancy Drew's Enigmatic Evasion" (PDF) . The Lion and the Unicorn (ProjectMuse) 20 (1): 19–22. doi : 10.1353/chq.0.1051 . Retrieved October 29, 2010 . Lapin, Geoffrey (April 1989). "The Ghost of Nancy Drew" . Books at Iowa . Retrieved March 15, 2009 . Leibrock, Rachel (March 13, 2004). "Redrawing Nancy Drew for a New Age" . The (MA) Standard-Times . Leigh Brown, Patricia (April 25, 1993). "Nancy Drew: '90s role model". St. Petersburg (FL) Times . pp. 1D. Literarture (2009). "Nancy Drew: The Dust Jacket Collection" . Retrieved April 6, 2009 . Lundin, Anne H (January 2003). "Everygirl's Good Deeds: The Heroics of Nancy Drew". The Lion and the Unicorn (ProjectMuse) 27 (1): 120–130. doi : 10.1353/uni.2003.0005 . Macleod, Anne Scott (1995). American Childhood: Essays on children's literature of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries . University of Georgia Press. ISBN 0-8203-1803-5 . Mason, Bobbie Ann (1995). The Girl Sleuth (Second ed.). University of Georgia Press. ISBN 0-8203-1739-X . McClintock, Pamela (March 21, 2007). "Trio clues in to "Drew" sequel" . Variety . Retrieved March 18, 2009 . McFeatters, Ann Carey (2005). Sandra Day O'Connor: Justice in the Balance . UNM Press. ISBN 0-8263-3218-8 . Mitchell, Claudia; Sandra Weber (1995). That's funny, you don't look like a teacher!: interrogating images and identity in popular culture . Routledge. ISBN 0-7507-0413-6 . Musser, Cody (July 13, 2007). "New Nancy Drew: The Deadly Secret of Olde World Park Media" . Retrieved March 16, 2009 . Nash, Ilana (2006). American Sweethearts: Teenage Girls in Twentieth-Century Popular Culture . Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-253-21802-0 . O'Rourke, Meghan (November 8, 2004). "Nancy Drew's Father" . The New Yorker . Paretsky, Sara (1991). Introduction to "The Secret of the Old Clock" . Applewood Books. ISBN 1-55709-155-2 . Parry, Sally (1997). Sherrie, Inness, ed. Nancy Drew and Company: Culture, Gender, and Girls' Series . Popular Press 1. ISBN 0-87972-736-5 . Pickard, Nancy (1991). Introduction to "The Hidden Staircase" . Applewood Books. ISBN 1-55709-156-0 . Peters, Carol; Clough, Paul; Gey, Fredric C.; Karlgren, Jussi; Magnini, Bernardo, eds. (2007). Evaluation of Multilingual and Multi-modal Information Retrieval: 7th Workshop of the Cross-Language Evaluation Forum, CLEF 2006, Alicante, Spain, September 20–22, 2006, Revised Selected Papers . Springer. ISBN 3-540-74998-5 . Plunkett-Powell, Karen (1993). The Nancy Drew Scrapbook: 60 years of America's favorite teenage sleuth . St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0-312-09881-2 . Rehak, Melanie (2006). Girl Sleuth: Nancy Drew and the Women Who Created Her . Harvest. ISBN 0-15-603056-X . Shangraw Fox, Lea. "Around the World With Nancy Drew" . Retrieved March 15, 2009 . Shulman, Polly (May 6, 2007). "Spunky Nancy Drew faces her hardest case: Hollywood" . The New York Times . Retrieved March 18, 2009 . Skjønsberg, Kari (June 1994). "Nancy, a.k.a. Kitty, Susanne, Alice—in Norway and Other European Countries". The Lion and the Unicorn 18 (1): 70–77. doi : 10.1353/uni.0.0327 . ISSN 0147-2593 . "Sleuths Go Graphic" (March 10, 2008). The Hindu (English) (Madras, India) . Accessed through Access World News on May 19, 2009. Springen, Karen; Susannah Meadows (February 16, 2005). "Nancy's Still Nice". Newsweek . Stowe, Jennifer (April 1999). "The Visual Rewriting of Nancy Drew" (PDF) . University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill . Retrieved March 15, 2009 . Strauss, Gary (January 15, 2004). "Nancy Drew dusts off 'musty appeal' for new readers" . USA Today . Szadkowski, Joseph (August 17, 2008). "ROMper ROOM: Kids tell own tales with V-Tech system" . The Washington Times . Retrieved April 6, 2009 . —— (February 1, 2009). "Nancy's success no mystery". The Washington Times . p. M18. "The Top 20 Heroes". Entertainment Weekly 1041 : 36. April 3, 2009. Torrance, Kelly Jane (June 15, 2007). "Independent Nancy Drew, feminist heroine before her time". The Washington Times . pp. D01. TurboNuts (February 7, 2007). "Nancy Drew makes her debut on Nintendo DS" . TurboNuts . Retrieved March 16, 2009 . Weiss, Debra Cassens (May 15, 2009). "Switch from Nancy Drew to Perry Mason Laid Path for Sotomayor" . ABA Journal . Retrieved May 26, 2009 . External links [ edit ] Nancy Drew Around The World Information on international Nancy Drew editions. Series-Books.com Nancy Drew Page Information on the books in the Nancy Drew series. Nancy Drew Unofficial Home Page Information on the books & cover art in the Nancy Drew series. v t e Nancy Drew The series and novels Nancy Drew Mystery Stories 1930s The Secret of the Old Clock (1930) The Hidden Staircase (1930) The Bungalow Mystery (1930) The Mystery at Lilac Inn (1931) The Secret at Shadow Ranch (1931) The Secret of Red Gate Farm (1931) The Clue in the Diary (1932) Nancy's Mysterious Letter (1932) The Sign of the Twisted Candles (1933) The Password to Larkspur Lane (1933) The Clue of the Broken Locket (1934) The Message in the Hollow Oak (1935) The Mystery of the Ivory Charm (1936) The Whispering Statue (1937) The Haunted Bridge (1937) The Clue of the Tapping Heels (1939) 1940s The Mystery of the Brass-Bound Trunk (1940) The Mystery at the Moss-Covered Mansion (1941) The Quest of the Missing Map (1942) The Clue in the Jewel Box (1943) The Secret in the Old Attic (1944) The Clue in the Crumbling Wall (1945) The Mystery of the Tolling Bell (1946) The Clue in the Old Album (1947) The Ghost of Blackwood Hall (1948) The Clue of the Leaning Chimney (1949) 1950s The Secret of the Wooden Lady (1950) The Clue of the Black Keys (1951) The Mystery at the Ski Jump (1952) The Clue of the Velvet Mask (1953) The Ringmaster's Secret (1953) The Scarlet Slipper Mystery (1954) The Witch Tree Symbol (1955) The Hidden Window Mystery (1956) The Haunted Showboat (1957) The Secret of the Golden Pavilion (1959) 1960s The Clue in the Old Stagecoach (1960) The Mystery of the Fire Dragon (1961) The Clue of the Dancing Puppet (1962) The Moonstone Castle Mystery (1963) The Clue of the Whistling Bagpipes (1964) The Phantom of Pine Hill (1965) The Mystery of the 99 Steps (1966) The Clue in the Crossword Cipher (1967) The Spider Sapphire Mystery (1968) The Invisible Intruder (1969) 1970s The Mysterious Mannequin (1970) The Crooked Banister (1971) The Secret of Mirror Bay (1972) The Double Jinx Mystery (1973) Mystery of the Glowing Eye (1974) The Secret of the Forgotten City (1975) The Sky Phantom (1976) The Strange Message in the Parchment (1977) Mystery of Crocodile Island (1978) The Thirteenth Pearl (1979) The Triple Hoax (1979) 1980s The Flying Saucer Mystery (1980) The Secret in the Old Lace (1980) The Greek Symbol Mystery (1980) The Swami's Ring (1981) The Kachina Doll Mystery (1981) The Twin Dilemma (1981) Captive Witness (1981) Race Against Time (1982) The Broken Anchor (1983) The Mardi Gras Mystery (1988) The Case of the Rising Stars (1988) 1990s The Mystery of the Masked Rider (1992) The Treasure in the Royal Tower (1995) The Wedding Day Mystery (1997) The E-mail Mystery (1998) 2000s Whispers In the Fog (2000) The Legend of the Emerald Lady (2000) Mystery By Moonlight (2002) The Bike Tour Mystery (2002) The Mistletoe Mystery (2002) No Strings Attached (2003) The Riding Club Crime (2003) Danger on the Great Lakes (2003) Werewolf in a Winter Wonderland (2003) The Nancy Drew Files Secrets Can Kill (1986) Stay Tuned for Danger (1987) Death by Design (1988) The Final Scene (1989) The Suspect Next Door (1989) The Nancy Drew Notebooks The Slumber Party Secret , etc. Nancy Drew and the Clue Crew Sleepover Sleuths , etc. Nancy Drew On Campus New Lives, New Loves , etc. Nancy Drew, Girl Detective Without a Trace (2004) A Race Against Time (2004) False Notes (2004) High Risk (2004) Hardy Boys crossovers Super Sleuth Be a Detective SuperMysteries Super Mysteries Video games Adventure series Secrets Can Kill (1998) ( Remastered ) Stay Tuned for Danger (1999) Message in a Haunted Mansion (2000) Treasure in the Royal Tower (2001) The Final Scene (2001) Secret of the Scarlet Hand (2002) Ghost Dogs of Moon Lake (2002) The Haunted Carousel (2003) Danger on Deception Island (2003) The Secret of Shadow Ranch (2004) Curse of Blackmoor Manor (2004) Secret of the Old Clock (2005) Last Train to Blue Moon Canyon (2005) Danger By Design (2006) The Creature of Kapu Cave (2006) The White Wolf of Icicle Creek (2007) Legend of the Crystal Skull (2007) The Phantom of Venice (2008) The Haunting of Castle Malloy (2008) Ransom of the Seven Ships (2009) Warnings at Waverly Academy (2009) Trail of the Twister (2010) Shadow at the Water's Edge (2010) The Captive Curse (2011) Alibi in Ashes (2011) Tomb of the Lost Queen (2012) The Deadly Device (2012) Ghost of Thornton Hall (2013) The Silent Spy (2013) The Shattered Medallion (2014) Labyrinth of Lies (2014) Sea of Darkness (2015) Midnight in Salem (2016) Dossier series Lights, Camera, Curses (2008) Resorting to Danger (2009) Other works Nancy Drew... Detective (1938) Nancy Drew... Reporter (1939) Nancy Drew... Trouble Shooter (1939) Nancy Drew and the Hidden Staircase (1939) Nancy Drew (2007 film) The Hardy Boys/Nancy Drew Mysteries Supermystery The Nancy Drew Files Girl Detective Nancy Drew (1995 TV series) Characters Nancy Drew George Fayne Bess Marvin Ned Nickerson Helen Corning Carson Drew Hannah Gruen Eloise Drew Togo Writers Edward Stratemeyer Mildred Benson Harriet Adams Walter Karig Susan Wittig Albert See also Carolyn Keene Stratemeyer Syndicate The Hardy Boys The Dana Girls Torchy Blane v t e Juvenile Series books (1930–1979) Girls' books Beverly Gray (1934–1955) Cherry Ames (1943–1968) Connie Blair (1948–1956) Dana Girls (1934–1979) Ginny Gordon (1948–1956) Judy Bolton (1932–1967) Kay Tracey (1934–1942) Nancy Drew (original series, 1930–1979) Penny Parker (1939–1947) Sue Barton (1936–1952) Trixie Belden (1948–1986) Vicki Barr (1947–1967) The Happy Hollisters (1953–1970) Boys' books Biff Brewster (1960–1965) Brains Benton (1959–1961) Bronc Burnett (1948–1967) Christopher Cool (1967–1969) Danny Dunn (1956–1977) Chip Hilton (1948–1965) The Hardy Boys (1927–1979) Ken Holt (1949–1963) The Happy Hollisters (1953–1970) Power Boys (1964–1967) Rick Brant (1947–1968) Tom Corbett, Space Cadet (1952–1956) Tom Quest (1947–1955) Tom Swift, Jr. (1954–1971)
