Sport and recreation

/wiki/Broad_Ripple_Park_Carousel
Broad Ripple Park Carousel
Broad Ripple Park Carousel U.S. National Register of Historic Places U.S. National Historic Landmark The restored carousel in The Children's Museum of Indianapolis Location Meridian and Thirtieth Streets, Indianapolis, Indiana , United States Coordinates 39°48′39″N 86°9′25.5″W ﻿ / ﻿ 39.81083°N 86.157083°W ﻿ / 39.81083; -86.157083 Coordinates : 39°48′39″N 86°9′25.5″W ﻿ / ﻿ 39.81083°N 86.157083°W ﻿ / 39.81083; -86.157083 Built 1917 Architect William F. Mangels ; Gustav Dentzel NRHP Reference # 87000839 Significant dates Added to NRHP February 27, 1987 Designated NHL February 27, 1987 Broad Ripple Park Carousel , also known as White City Carousel and Children's Museum Carousel , [ 1 ] is an antique carousel in The Children's Museum of Indianapolis . It was installed in 1917 at an amusement park near the White River in Indianapolis, Indiana , where it remained until the building housing it collapsed in 1956. The ride's mechanism was destroyed, but the animals were relatively unscathed and put into storage by the park's owners, the Indianapolis Department of Parks and Recreation . The animals were carved by the Dentzel Carousel Company some time before 1900 but were assembled by the William F. Mangels carousel company, which also supplied the engine powering the ride. The Children's Museum of Indianapolis acquired its first two carved animals from the ride in 1965, and the last few wooden animals in 1973. The museum planned to sell some to finance the restoration of others until the director of the museum, Mildred Compton, was convinced by carousel enthusiasts that the museum should instead restore all the animals and recreate the working carousel. Restoration of the carved animals began in 1966 and was only finished with the restoration of the entire carousel in 1977. No space had been allocated for the display of such a large exhibit in the museum's planned new building, which meant some re-designing was necessary to allow its installation on the fifth floor. A 1919 Wurlitzer organ model 146B, a type manufactured only for carousels, was also installed. As restored, the carousel is 42 feet (13 meters) wide and has a total of 42 animals, including – as well as the usual horses – goats, giraffes, deer, a lion, and a tiger. It was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1987. Contents 1 History 1.1 Background 1.2 Installation 1.3 Park usage 1.4 Acquisition by the museum 1.5 Restoration 1.6 Changes since initial restoration 1.7 QRpedia 2 Carousel composition 3 Notes 4 Citations 5 References History [ edit ] Background [ edit ] See also: White City (Indianapolis) The Broad Ripple Park Carousel was installed in 1917 in an amusement park on the outskirts of Indianapolis, Indiana. The White City Amusement Park had been established in 1906 in what is now Broad Ripple Village , alongside the White River. In 1908 a fire caused damage throughout the park, and only the swimming pool remained unscathed. [ 2 ] The park closed for three years until its purchase by the Union Traction Company , which restored it and operated it for eleven years. The carousel was installed during the Union Traction Company's ownership. The park was sold in May 1922 to the new Broad Ripple Amusement Park Association, and renamed Broad Ripple Park. In 1927 the park was sold again, [ 2 ] and changed hands once more in 1938. [ 3 ] The Board of Parks Commission of Indianapolis bought the property on May 18, 1945, paying $131,500 (approximately $1.73 million as of 2016) for the 60-acre (24-hectare) tract, and turned the property into a general-use park, destroying all rides it could not sell. [ 2 ] [ 4 ] The board's original plan was to sell the carousel and the narrow-gauge railway rides. [ 5 ] Only the carousel remained in Indianapolis after it was unsold; [ 2 ] the steam locomotive is now at the Indiana Transportation Museum at Noblesville, Indiana . [ 6 ] Installation [ edit ] The carousel was commissioned by William Hubbs, [ 3 ] who had it installed in White City Amusement Park in 1917. Built on a Mangel-Illions mechanism, it used animals carved by the Dentzel carousel company of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania , sometime before 1900. [ 1 ] The carousel was assembled by the William F. Mangels carousel company in 1917. [ 3 ] It was probably not the first carousel in the park, as there are indications of a previous ride that came from Hartford, Connecticut . [ 7 ] [ a ] Nothing is known of the history of the animals before their installation in the 1917 carousel assembly. [ 1 ] During the 1960s newspaper reports stated that it was believed that the animals had arrived in Indianapolis in 1917, imported from Germany by two brothers named Mangels, [ 8 ] but later research revealed the animals were manufactured by the Dentzel carousel company. [ 1 ] Also included in the installation were oil paintings on the canopy over the animals and mechanism. [ 8 ] Part of the installation appears to have involved the retrofitting of some animals to fit the Mangels mechanism. During this process some of the animals, which were carved in stationary or standing positions and thus not meant to be "jumpers" (animals that moved up and down), were modified to allow them to move. [ 9 ] Park usage [ edit ] A row of giraffes was always part of one of Dentzel's carousels, as they were his favorite animal. Between 1917 and 1938 the carousel was located near the White City park pool, in an enclosed building with numerous large windows. In 1938, after the park was purchased by William McCurry, [ 3 ] the ride was enclosed within an unwalled pavilion with a domed roof and moved to the area of the park set aside as a children's playground. [ 1 ] The carousel was operated as a concession , which one operator, William Hubbs, [ b ] held for almost 10 years. [ 10 ] The park district does not appear to have moved the carousel after taking over in 1945, as a 1955 newspaper article noted it was still in the same spot it had occupied for 38 years. [ 8 ] The carousel was again operated as a concession within the park, this time by the wife of Everett DuBois, the park superintendent. Like Hubbs, Mrs. DuBois operated the carousel for almost 10 years. [ 10 ] Although the district did not change the ride's location, it noted in 1955 that the equipment was showing its age. In 1955 the park district attempted to paint over the oil paintings on the canopy, which had deteriorated. The Indianapolis Art League objected, and volunteered to restore the original paintings rather than have them painted over with Disney characters . [ 8 ] The domed pavilion housing the mechanism collapsed in 1956, destroying the mechanism and the sweeps that supported the animals. The park district disposed of the destroyed mechanical parts and stored the animals. [ 1 ] In 1961 the giraffes, along with other animals from the carousel, were used in a Christmas display at University Park in Indianapolis. During this time, discussions began between the park district and the Indianapolis Zoological Society about the possibility of the Zoological Society acquiring the animals for use in its children's zoo section. [ 8 ] In April 1962 newspaper reports stated that the animals were to be donated to the zoo, for installation in the main zoo; the zoo planned to purchase a smaller merry-go-round for the children's zoo. [ 11 ] The animals were apparently still being offered to the zoo in December 1963, as a newspaper story announced that the park district had just given the zoo authorization to use the carousel parts, and volunteers were being sought to restore the animals. The president of the Zoological Society described the animals as "bigger and more realistically colored, and more intricately detailed, sturdier, and they have more different kinds of animals than that aluminum junk they throw out today". [ 12 ] Acquisition by the museum [ edit ] Closeup of the heads of the row of goats In 1965 The Children's Museum of Indianapolis, [ 1 ] then located in a building at 30th and Meridian Streets, [ 3 ] acquired two horses from the carousel. [ 1 ] Mildred Compton, the museum director, had seen the carousel in Broad Ripple Park before 1952, and hoped to secure the surviving animals, but the park district was initially unwilling to part with more than two, as the district was using five or six animals in the annual Christmas displays at Monument Circle . During the first half of 1966, the two horses were refinished by a museum volunteer. Both were stripped of old paint, one was repainted, and the other was refinished with lemon oil to feature the carvings on the animal. Compton obtained real horse tails from an Indianapolis slaughterhouse to replace the lost originals. By September 1966 the two horses were ready for display in the museum's front entrance. [ 13 ] The park district allowed the museum to use one of the surviving giraffes in a booth at a fall festival held at the Indianapolis Museum of Art in 1968. [ 13 ] [ c ] The museum subsequently acquired most of the remaining animals in 1969, after a search through the storage building containing the animals. The animals and parts of animals had to be searched for in corners and under boxes in the park district storage building. [ 3 ] [ d ] Besides a large number of horses, 2 more giraffes, a lion, and a tiger were found. Photographs of the animals were sent to Frederic Fried, an expert in carousels, who confirmed that the animals were made in the United States, not Germany, probably before 1900. He also confirmed that they were carved by the Dentzel company. [ 14 ] The museum intended to keep a few of the animals and sell the others to finance its operations, [ 1 ] but Mildred Compton returned from a visit to the 1973 National Carousel Roundtable convinced that it should instead restore all of them and recreate the working carousel in its planned new building. [ 1 ] But no space had been allocated to allow the display of such a large exhibit, requiring the plans to be adjusted. Columns required in the original layout were removed to allow the carousel's installation on the fifth floor. [ 3 ] While plans were under way to secure funding for the restoration of the carousel, efforts were made to find some missing animals. By studying old photographs of the carousel, it was determined there had been three deer or stags which had not been found in the park district storage building. No one at the park district knew of their whereabouts, and some employees believed the animals had disintegrated. As well as the missing deer, two horses were missing. The museum contacted local newspapers, which published stories on the efforts to restore the carousel. The reports mentioned the missing animals, and that the museum was trying to locate them. An anonymous tip received in December 1973 revealed the deer were used in the annual Christmas Gift and Hobby Show, where they served as escorts for Santa Claus. Compton was able to secure the animals from the park district for the museum. [ 15 ] Restoration [ edit ] The head of one of the carousel's horses The mechanical parts were assembled in the fifth-floor area in November 1975, [ 3 ] using a non-original Mangel-Illions mechanism. A Wurlitzer carousel organ, which had belonged to an amusement park in San Francisco , was added. Before it was installed in the Children's Museum, the organ was refurbished and rebuilt [ 1 ] by Carval Stoots of Plainfield, Indiana , in 1976. [ 3 ] An artist from Pennsylvania recreated the upper outside panels in the style of the carousels of the period around the time of World War I . [ 1 ] The carvings on the panels were provided by Allen and Rita Orre of Ohio and the International Amusement Devices Company of Ohio; the mirrors were produced by an Indianapolis glass firm. The scenery panels were initially some discovered Dentzel company panels, and these were used in 1976 and 1977 while replica Mangels-Illions-style panels were built in the museum's shops. [ 3 ] The animals were restored between 1975 and 1977 by Bill and Caroline Von Stein of Cincinnati, Ohio . The Von Steins were experienced with other types of museum conservation work, but had never restored carousel animals. Because of the animals' poor condition, no attempt was made to restore them to their original paintwork; instead, the restorers were allowed to use their judgment on color choices and other decorations. The museum's only requirements were that they use reasonably natural decorative schemes and no high-gloss paint. [ 3 ] Changes since initial restoration [ edit ] The original engine propelling the carousel was a belt-driven mechanism, but after the initial restoration it was exchanged for a fluid drive provided by the Kissell Brothers Amusement Rides company of Cincinnati, Ohio, [ e ] who suggested the platform for the carousel be improved. To provide crowd control, a pavilion was built over the carousel and a ticket booth was installed. Neither was based on any extant buildings, but each was a composite of several other structures. The animals are removed one at a time from the carousel for routine maintenance and refurbishment, which is carried out in the museum's own shops. [ 3 ] The carousel was designated a National Historic Landmark on February 27, 1987, [ 17 ] and the National Historic Landmarks Program assessed its condition as "satisfactory" in 2008. [ 17 ] The carousel is one of the largest displayed artifacts in the museum, and is available to be ridden by visitors. [ 18 ] QRpedia [ edit ] Label using a QRpedia code to direct visitors to the Wikipedia article on the carousel. The carousel features a QR code as part of the museum's involvement in the QRpedia project. [ 19 ] Visitors may scan the code with a suitable mobile device and will be served the Wikipedia article about it, in whatever language their device is set to use, if available. [ 20 ] Carousel composition [ edit ] The carousel is one of the three oldest surviving Dentzel menagerie carousels. [ f ] [ 17 ] Thirty-one of its 42 wood-carved animals are horses, 17 standing and 14 jumping. There are also three goats, three giraffes, three deer, one lion, and one tiger. [ 21 ] The single lion and tiger are typical of Dentzel-created carousels, [ 22 ] as are the three giraffes; Gustav Dentzel's love of that animal resulted in all of his carousels including at least one row of giraffes. [ 23 ] The animals are arranged in three circles around the central mechanism, [ 21 ] alternating leaping or jumping horses with stationary animals. [ 1 ] Typical for a Mangels-Illions manufactured carousel, there are 18 jumping animals, [ 3 ] all but one of which is original; the horse that could not be found in 1975 was replaced with another Dentzel horse. Although the animals were not originally carved to display jewels, at some point they were so displayed at the amusement park, and thus the museum restored the animals on the outside circle with jewels. [ 1 ] The mechanism powering the ride is a 40-foot (12-meter) diameter Mangels-Illions manufactured carousel, but it is uncertain whether this exactly matches the original Mangels-Illions mechanism. [ 1 ] The whole assembly has a diameter of 42 feet (13 meters). [ 3 ] The organ, a 1919 Wurlitzer carousel organ model 146B, is of a type designed specifically for carousels. [ 1 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ If the previous carousel has been correctly identified, it then went to Virginia and then to Fort Wayne, Indiana after leaving Indianapolis. [ 7 ] ^ It is not clear if this is the same man as the former owner of the park or not. ^ During the festival, the large number of children around the giraffe caused the animal to fall over and its head broke off. [ 13 ] ^ Originally, the animals were considered a loan from the park district, but after the new museum building was completed the park district officially donated them. [ 14 ] ^ The source used for this information spells the company name "Kissell", but the company itself uses "Kissel". [ 16 ] ^ The other two are the Spencer Park Dentzel Carousel in Logansport, Indiana and the Highland Park Dentzel Carousel in Meridian, Mississippi . [ 1 ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q Charleton " National Register of Historic Places Inventory-Nomination: Broad Ripple Park ("White City") Carousel / Children's Museum Carousel " ^ a b c d Vanderstel and Zeigler "Broad Ripple Park" Encyclopedia of Indianapolis pp. 353–354 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Crandell "Children's Museum Carousel" Merry-Go-Roundup pp. 16–18 ^ Consumer Price Index (estimate) 1800– . Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. Retrieved November 10, 2015. ^ McCord "City to Junk Ripple Rides" Indianapolis Star ^ Indy Parks and Recreation " Broad Ripple Park " Indy Parks ^ a b Kriplen Keep an Eye on that Mummy p. 186 ^ a b c d e Casler "Children's Zoo May Get Carousel From the City" Indianapolis Times ^ Manns, et al. Painted Ponies p. 33 ^ a b Vanderstel and Zeigler In Pursuit of Leisure Time pp. 118–119 ^ Staff "Zoo to have City's Prized Carousel" Indianapolis Times ^ Kingan "Zoo Wants to Reclaim Old Indianapolis Merry-Go-Round" Indianapolis Times ^ a b c Kriplen Keep an Eye on that Mummy pp. 187–188 ^ a b Kriplen Keep an Eye on that Mummy pp. 189–190 ^ Kriplen Keep an Eye on that Mummy pp. 191–192 ^ Kissel Brothers Shows " About Us " ^ a b c Staff " Broad Ripple Park Carousel " National Historic Landmarks Program ^ Children's Museum of Indianapolis " Carousel Wishes and Dreams " ^ Byrd Phillips " QR codes + Wikipedia = QRpedia " ^ Byrd Phillips Going Multilingual with QRpedia ^ a b National Carousel Association " Census of Classic Wood Carousels: The Children's Museum of Indianapolis " ^ Manns, et al. Painted Ponies p. 42 ^ Manns, et al. Painted Ponies p. 48 References [ edit ] Byrd Phillips, Lori (June 15, 2011). "Going Multilingual with QRpedia" . Marcus Institute for Digital Education in the Arts . Retrieved August 25, 2011 . Byrd Phillips, Lori (July 29, 2011). "QR codes + Wikipedia = QRpedia" . The Children's Museum of Indianapolis . Retrieved August 25, 2011 . Casler, Conrad (December 24, 1961). "Children's Zoo May Get Carousel From the City". Indianapolis Times . p. 7 col. 1. Children's Museum of Indianapolis, The. "Carousel Wishes and Dreams" . The Children's Museum of Indianapolis. Archived from the original on October 13, 2013 . Retrieved January 15, 2011 . Charleton, James H. (February 13, 1985). "National Register of Historic Places Inventory-Nomination: Broad Ripple Park ("White City") Carousel / Children's Museum Carousel" (pdf) . National Park Service . Retrieved January 13, 2011 . Crandell, Dwight (1981). "The Children's Museum Carousel". Merry-Go-Roundup ( National Carousel Association ) 8 (2): 16–18. Indy Parks and Recreation (2007). "Broad Ripple Park" . Indy Parks . Government of the City of Indianapolis and Marion County, Indiana . Retrieved January 13, 2011 . Kingan, Jeff (December 6, 1963). "Zoo Wants to Reclaim Old Indianapolis Merry-Go-Round". Indianapolis Times . p. 1 col. 1. Kissel Brothers Shows (2004). "About Us" . Kissel Brothers Shows . Retrieved March 29, 2012 . Kriplen, Nancy (1982). Keep an Eye on that Mummy: A History of The Children's Museum of Indianapolis . Indianapolis, IN: The Children's Museum of Indianapolis. ISBN 0-9608982-0-4 . Manns, William; Stevens, Marianne; and Shank, Peggy (1986). Painted Ponies . Milwood, NY: American Carousel Art. ISBN 0-939549-01-8 . McCord, Al G. (November 18, 1946). "City to Junk Ripple Rides". Indianapolis Star . National Carousel Association (December 8, 2010). "Census of Classic Wood Carousels: The Children's Museum of Indianapolis" . National Carousel Association . Retrieved January 12, 2011 . Staff. "Broad Ripple Park Carousel" . National Historic Landmarks Program . National Park Service . Retrieved January 13, 2011 . Staff (April 27, 1962). "Zoo to have City's Prized Carousel". Indianapolis Times . p. 13 col. 2. Vanderstel, David and Zeigler, Carol (1994). "Broad Ripple Park (White City Amusement Park)". In Bodenhamer, David. The Encyclopedia of Indianapolis . Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. pp. 353–354. ISBN 0-253-31222-1 . Vanderstel, David and Zeigler, Carol (1992). In Pursuit of Leisure Time: The Development and Role of Amusement Parks in Indianapolis: 1880s – 1970 . Indianapolis, IN: Encyclopedia of Indianapolis. v t e National Historic Landmarks in Indiana ( List ) Allen County Courthouse Angel Mounds Auburn Cord Duesenberg Automobile Facility Joseph Bailly Homestead Broad Ripple Park Carousel Butler Fieldhouse Cannelton Cotton Mill Chief Jean-Baptiste de Richardville House Levi Coffin House Eugene V. Debs Home Donald B. Eleutherian College Classroom and Chapel Building First Baptist Church First Christian Church Thomas Gaff House (Hillforest) Grouseland Benjamin Harrison Home Indiana World War Memorial Plaza Historic District Indianapolis Motor Speedway Irwin Union Bank and Trust Lanier Mansion Lincoln Boyhood Home Madison Historic District Mabel McDowell Elementary School Miller House New Harmony Historic District North Christian Church Oldfields (J.K. Lilly House) James Whitcomb Riley House Charles L. Shrewsbury House Spencer Park Dentzel Carousel Clement Studebaker House Tippecanoe Battlefield Madame C.J. Walker Manufacturing Company General Lew Wallace Study Wallace Circus Winter Headquarters Marie Webster House West Baden Springs Hotel List of National Historic Landmarks in Indiana v t e National Register of Historic Places in Indianapolis , Indiana Administration Building, Indiana Central University The Alameda The Alexandra Alfred M. Glossbrenner Mansion Allison Mansion The Ambassador Anderson-Thompson House Arthur Jordan Memorial Hall Aston Inn Athenaeum (Das Deutsche Haus) August Sommer House L.S. Ayres Annex Warehouse The Baker Balmoral Court Bals-Wocher House Bates-Hendricks House Benjamin Franklin Public School Number 36 Benjamin Harrison Home Benton House Bethel A.M.E. Church Big Run Baptist Church and Cemetery Joseph J. Bingham Indianapolis Public School No. 84 The Blacherne Brendonwood Historic District Broad Ripple Park Carousel The Buckingham The Burton Bush Stadium Butler Fieldhouse Byram-Middleton House Calvin I. Fletcher House Camp Edwin F. Glenn Carlos and Anne Recker House The Cathcart Central Court Historic District Central Library (Indianapolis-Marion County Public Library) The Chadwick Charles Kuhn House Chatham-Arch Historic District Christ Church Cathedral Christamore House Christian Park School No. 82 Circle Theater City Market Cole Motor Car Company The Colonial Columbia Club Cottage Home Historic District Cotton-Ropkey House Coulter Flats Crispus Attucks High School Crown Hill Cemetery Crown Hill National Cemetery The Dartmouth Delaware Court Delaware Flats The Devonshire The Emelie Ralph Waldo Emerson Indianapolis Public School No. 58 Esplanade Apartments Fidelity Trust Building Flanner House Homes Fletcher Place Historic District Forest Hills Historic District Fort Benjamin Harrison Historic District Fort Benjamin Harrison Historic District (Boundary Increase) Foster Hall General German Protestant Orphans Home George Philip Meier House George Stumpf House George Washington Tomlinson House The Glencoe Golden Hill Historic District The Grover Hammond Block (Budnick's Trading Mart) Hanna-Ochler-Elder House The Harriett Haughville Historic District Hawthorne Branch Library No. 2 Heier's Hotel Henry F. Campbell Mansion Henry P. Coburn Public School No. 66 Herron-Morton Place Historic District Hillcrest Country club Hiram A. Haverstick Farmstead Hollingsworth House Holy Rosary-Danish Church Historic District Horace Mann Public School No. 13 Hotel Washington Independent Turnverein Indiana Avenue Historic District Indiana Oxygen Company Indiana School for the Deaf Indiana Statehouse Indiana State Federation of Colored Women's Clubs Indiana State Library and Historical Building Indiana Theatre Indiana World War Memorial Plaza Indianapolis Fire Headquarters and Municipal Garage Indianapolis Masonic Temple Indianapolis Motor Speedway Indianapolis News Building Indianapolis Park and Boulevard System Indianapolis Union Station Indianapolis Union Station-Wholesale District Irvington Historic District James Whitcomb Riley House Jamieson-Bennett House John Fitch Hill House John Greenleaf Whittier School, No. 33 Johnson-Denny House Joseph J. Cole, Jr., House and 1925 Cole Brouette No. 70611 Julian-Clark House Laurel and Prospect District Linwood Colonial Apartments Lockefield Garden Apartments Lockerbie Square Historic District Lockerbie Square Historic District Amendment (Boundary Increase) The Lodge Lombard Building Louis Levey Mansion Madame C. J. Walker Building Majestic Building Manchester Apartments Marcy Village Apartments Marion County Bridge 0501F Marott Hotel Marott's Shoes Building Martens Massachusetts Massachusetts Avenue Commercial District Mayleeno McCormick Cabin Site McKay Merchants National Bank and Annex Meridian Park Historic District Michigan Road Toll House Military Park Morris-Butler House Morrison Block (M. O'Connor Grocery Wholesalers) Mt. Pisgah Lutheran Church Myrtle Fern New Augusta Historic District Nicholson-Rand House North Meridian Street Historic District Northside Historic District North Irvington Gardens Historic District Nurses' Sunken Garden and Convalescent Park Oldfields Old Indianapolis City Hall Old Northside Historic District Old Pathology Building Old Southport High School Oliver Johnson's Woods Historic District Oxford Pearson Terrace Pennsylvania Pierson-Griffiths House Plaza The Propylaeum (John W. Schmidt House) Prosser House Ransom Place Historic District Reserve Loan Life Insurance Company Rink Rink's Women's Apparel Store Rivoli Theater Roberts Park Methodist Episcopal Church Roy and Iris Corbin Lustron House Saint James Court St. John's Church and Rectory St. Joseph Neighborhood Historic District St. Mary's Catholic Church St. Philip Neri Parish Historic District Savoy Schnull-Rauch House Scottish Rite Cathedral Selig's Dry Goods Company Building The Seville Sheffield Inn Shelton Shortridge High School Sid-Mar Spink Spink Arms Hotel State Soldiers and Sailors Monument State and Prospect District Stewart Manor (Charles B. Sommers House) Sylvania Taylor Carpet Company Building Test Building Thomas Askren House Thomas Moore House Town of Crows Nest Historic District U.S. Arsenal (Arsenal Technical High School) U.S. Courthouse and Post Office University Park Vera and the Olga Vienna Virginia Avenue District Washington Park Historic District Washington Street-Monument Circle Historic District H. P. Wasson and Company Building West Washington Street Pumping Station Wheeler-Schebler Carburetor Company Wheeler-Stokely Mansion Wil-Fra-Mar William Buschmann Block William H. H. Graham House William N. Thompson House Wilson Woodruff Place Woodstock Country Club Wyndham YWCA Blue Triangle Residence Hall National Register of Historic Places in Indianapolis v t e U.S. National Register of Historic Places Topics Architectural style categories Contributing property Historic district History of the National Register of Historic Places Keeper of the Register National Park Service Property types Lists by states Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Lists by insular areas American Samoa Guam Minor Outlying Islands Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Lists by associated states Federated States of Micronesia Marshall Islands Palau Other areas District of Columbia Morocco Category Portal WikiProject v t e The Children's Museum of Indianapolis Broad Ripple Park Carousel Bucky Caplan Collection Captain Kidd's cannon Fireworks of Glass Reuben Wells The Power of Children Water Clock
