Video gaming

/wiki/Seiken_Densetsu_3
Seiken Densetsu 3
Seiken Densetsu 3 Developer(s) Square Publisher(s) Square Director(s) Hiromichi Tanaka Producer(s) Tetsuhisa Tsuruzono Designer(s) Koichi Ishii Artist(s) Nobuteru Yūki Hiroo Isono Composer(s) Hiroki Kikuta Series Mana Platform(s) SNES Release date(s) JP September 30, 1995 Genre(s) Action role-playing game Mode(s) Single-player , multiplayer Seiken Densetsu 3 ( 聖剣伝説3 ? , lit. "Legend of the Sacred Sword 3") is a 1995 action role-playing video game developed and published by Square (now Square Enix ) for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . It is the sequel to the 1993 game Seiken Densetsu 2 (released as Secret of Mana outside Japan), and is the third installment in the Mana series . Set in a high fantasy world, the game follows three heroes as they attempt to claim the legendary Mana Sword and prevent the God Beasts from being unleashed and destroying the world. It features three lengthy main plotlines and six different possible main characters, each with their own storylines, and allows two players to play simultaneously. Seiken Densetsu 3 builds on the gameplay of its predecessor with multiple enhancements, including the use of a time progression system with transitions from day to night and weekday to weekday in game time, and a wide range of character classes to choose from, which provides each character with an exclusive set of skills and status progression. The game was designed by series creator Koichi Ishii , directed by veteran Square designer Hiromichi Tanaka , and produced by Tetsuhisa Tsuruzono. Artwork was produced by manga and anime artist Nobuteru Yūki , while the music was composed by Secret of Mana composer Hiroki Kikuta . Although the game was only published in Japan, English-speaking players have been able to play Seiken Densetsu 3 due to an unofficial English fan translation , first released in 2000. Seiken Densetsu 3 received considerable acclaim from reviewers, who praised the graphics as among the best ever made for the Super Nintendo and the gameplay as an improved version of its predecessor's. The plot received mixed reviews by critics, who found the overlapping stories to be interesting and to enhance replayability, but the characters and plotlines themselves to be flat and clichéd. Overall, the game is considered by some critics to be a Super Nintendo classic and one of the best role-playing games of the 16-bit era . Contents 1 Gameplay 2 Plot 2.1 Setting 2.2 Characters 2.3 Story 3 Development 3.1 Music 4 Reception 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Gameplay [ edit ] Angela, Duran, and Lise fighting Land Umber, the Earth God Beast Seiken Densetsu 3 has similar gameplay to its predecessor, Secret of Mana . Like many other role-playing games of the 16-bit era , the game displays a top-down perspective , in which the three player characters navigate the terrain and fight off hostile creatures. Control may be passed between each of the characters at any time; the companions not currently selected are controlled by artificial intelligence . The game may be played simultaneously by two players, as opposed to the three of Secret of Mana . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] There are six possible player characters. At the beginning of the game, the player chooses which three of them will be playable and which one they will start with; the other two playable characters will join the party when met. The remaining three characters act as non-playable characters (NPCs) when encountered. [ 3 ] Each character can use one type of weapon, in addition to magical spells. The effectiveness of spells depends on the magical ability of the character and the element of the spell in relation to the enemy. [ 4 ] When in battle mode, attacking monsters fills a gauge that allows the player to use character-specific special attacks. [ 1 ] Upon collecting enough experience points in battle, each character can increase in level to gain improved character statistics such as strength and evasion. [ 5 ] Options such as changing equipment, casting spells , or checking status are performed by cycling through the game's Ring Commands—a circular menu which hovers over the controlled party member. The game is paused whenever the Ring Command menu is activated. Within the Ring, the player has nine slots for storing items; additional items can be placed into item storage, which is inaccessible in combat. [ 4 ] Character level progression is coordinated by the player, as a choice is given as to which statistic to raise by a point at every level up. A " class " system is also present. Once a character reaches level 18, the player can visit one of several Mana Stones located throughout the game and choose to upgrade them to one of two classes for each character—either a class aligned to "Light" or a class aligned to "Dark"—which provides a different set of skills and different improvements to character statistics. A second class change may be optionally performed at level 38, again split between a light and a dark choice, if the player has obtained a required rare item for the target class. The class changes do not affect the plot of the game, only gameplay. [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Seiken Densetsu 3 also employs a calendar function into its gameplay. A week cycles much more quickly than an actual one, with a day passing in a matter of minutes. Each day of the week is represented by a different elemental spirit . On that spirit's day, magic of that element will be slightly stronger. An in-game day is also divided into day and night. Certain events only happen during certain times of day, such as a nighttime-only black market selling particularly rare items. Enemies encountered in the field also change during certain time periods, and some may be sleeping if the characters approach them at night. In addition, the character Kevin transforms into a werewolf when he fights at night, greatly increasing his attack power. Using an inn's services allows the player to "skip" the game's clock to that day's evening, or the following morning. [ 6 ] Plot [ edit ] Setting [ edit ] The story takes place in a fictional world where Mana represents an ethereal, but finite, energy source. Some time in the past, the Mana Goddess created the game's world by forging the powerful Sword of Mana and defeating eight "God Beasts" with it, sealing them within eight Mana Stones, before turning herself into the Mana Tree and falling asleep. [ 7 ] The game is set at a time when Mana starts to fade and peace has ended, as several people plot to unleash the God Beasts from the stones so as to gain ultimate power. [ 8 ] The game is not a direct sequel to the events in Secret of Mana ; according to series creator Koichi Ishii in 2006, the Mana games do not take place in exactly the same world, and characters or elements who appear in different games are best considered alternate versions of each other. Instead, the connections between each title are more abstract than story-based. [ 9 ] Despite this statement, the 2007 game Heroes of Mana is a direct prequel to Seiken Densetsu 3 , taking place 19 years before the latter's story. [ 10 ] Characters [ edit ] The characters (and their individual stories) are grouped into three main sub-plots. Angela and Duran oppose the Dragon Emperor, Hawk and Lise oppose the Dark Prince, and Kevin and Carlie oppose the Masked Mage. [ Note 1 ] The main storyline is determined by the first character chosen, though there is significantly more character interaction and dialogue if the other member of the pair is also in the party. [ 5 ] Angela ( アンジェラ , Anjera ? ) is the princess of the ice-covered Magic Kingdom of Altena. Her mother uses her magic to keep the citadel in Altena in a perpetual Spring, but the spell weakens as Mana starts to fade. To power the spell, she and her assistant wizard Koren decide to invade other nations to claim their Mana Stones, though the spell to use the Stone is fatal to the caster. When the Queen tries to force Angela to use it, she flees from Altena. [ 11 ] Her paired character is Duran ( デュラン , Dyuran ? ) , an orphaned mercenary swordsman of the Grasslands Kingdom of Valsena. His father Loki was lost in battle with the Dragon Emperor. [ 12 ] One night, Duran is on guard duty at the castle of Valsena when Koren attacks the castle. Duran is left for dead after confronting him, and after recovering he vows to become the best swordsman in the world and to exact his revenge upon Koren. [ 13 ] Hawk ( ホークアイ , Hōkuai ? , lit. "Hawkeye") is a member of a guild of noble thieves based in the desert Sand Fortress of Navarre. The guild's leader, Lord Flamekhan, suddenly and uncharacteristically declares Navarre to be a kingdom. [ 14 ] Hawk decides to confront Flamekhan about it, only to discover he is being controlled by the witch Isabella. Isabella kills Eagle, Flamekhan's son and Hawk's friend, framing Hawk for his death and forcing him to flee. [ 15 ] His paired character is Lise ( リース , Rīsu ? ) , the princess of the mountainous Wind Kingdom of Rolante and captain of its Amazon army. Two mysterious ninjas from Navarre trick her younger brother Elliott into turning off Rolante's protective winds and kidnap him. With the winds gone, Navarre attacks Rolante with a cloud of sleep powder and kills its king. Devastated, Lise makes her escape. [ 16 ] Kevin ( ケヴィン , Kevin ? ) is the prince of the Beast Kingdom. He is the son of the Beast King, who is sick of the treatment of his people by "normal" humans. His desired revenge is made possible by the appearance of Deathjester. He shows the king his abilities by forcing Kevin to awaken his werewolf abilities by killing Kevin's best friend. When Kevin confronts the Beast King on this act and the King's plans to invade the human Holy City Wendel, Kevin is thrown out of the kingdom and swears revenge. [ 17 ] His paired character is Carlie ( シャルロット , Sharurotto ? , lit. "Charlotte") , the half-elf granddaughter of the Priest of Light in Wendell. An orphan, she is looked after by a fellow cleric, Heath. Feeling an evil influence in nearby Jadd, the Priest of Light sends Heath to investigate, but Charlotte follows to witness Deathjester abduct Heath. She decides to journey to save him. [ 18 ] Story [ edit ] The story begins in a different place for each playable character. With the exception of Carlie, the main character is soon told (or otherwise decides) to seek the advice of the Priest of Light in the Holy City Wendel. They arrive at the city of Jadd soon after the Beastmen have invaded. Due to the Beastmen's werewolf powers, they are able to make an escape by night. The main character—now including Carlie—on the way to Wendel stays overnight in Astoria where they are woken by a bright light. [ 19 ] Following it, it reveals itself to be a Faerie from the Mana Sanctuary, exhausted by her journey. Out of desperation, the Faerie chooses the main character to be her host, and tells them to get to Wendel. There, while they explain their grievances to the Priest of Light, the Faerie interrupts and explains that the Mana Tree is dying and that the Sanctuary is in danger. The Priest explains that if the Tree dies, the God Beasts will reawaken and destroy the world. [ 20 ] He goes on to explain further that, because the Faerie has chosen the main character as its host, they must travel to the Sanctuary to draw the Sword of Mana from the foot of the Mana Tree. [ 21 ] They can then restore peace to the world, and have their wishes granted by the Mana Goddess if the sword is drawn before the Tree dies. [ 22 ] A great deal of power is needed to open the gate to the Sanctuary. The Faerie does not have the strength to do it, and the ancient spell which would do so by unlocking the power in the Mana Stones also takes the caster's life. The Stones' guarding elemental spirits, however, will to be able to open the gate if their powers are combined. [ 23 ] After journeying across the world to get the spirits, meeting the other two members of the party, thwarting the invasion attempts of Navarre and Altena, discovering the powers of the Fire and Water Mana Stones, and learning the disappearance of the Mana Stone of Darkness along the way, the main character tries to open the gate to the Mana Sanctuary with the spirits' assistance. [ 24 ] The first attempt fails, but the second succeeds; the Faerie realizes that it was opened because someone else released the power from all the Mana Stones. [ 25 ] The characters travel into the Sanctuary and the main character claims the Mana Sword. It is then discovered that the main character's adversaries—Koren and the Darkshine Knight for Angela and Duran; Jagan and Isabella for Lise and Hawk; or the Deathjester and a mind-controlled Heath, for Kevin and Charlotte—have defeated the other two sets of primary enemies. The remaining adversaries capture the Faerie and will only release her in exchange for the Mana Sword. The trade is made, and once the enemy receives the Sword, the Mana Stones shatter and the God Beasts are released. [ 26 ] The characters must then defeat the God Beasts before they can gather and destroy the world. However, after doing this they realize killing the God Beasts has given more power to their main enemy, who their personal enemies were working for—the Dragon Emperor for Duran and Angela, the Dark Prince for Hawk and Lise, and the Masked Mage for Kevin and Carlie. [ 27 ] The already powerful villain absorbs the power of the Sword of Mana and the God Beasts in order to become a god, but is halted by the Mana Goddess blocking some of its power. [ 28 ] After defeating the villain's minions, the characters go and defeat their main enemy, but are unable to stop him from destroying the Mana Tree and eliminating all Mana from the world. [ 29 ] The Faerie then fuses with what is left of the Mana Tree; she will become a new Mana Goddess in a thousand years, but until then Mana will not exist in the world. As the game ends, the characters go back to their homelands. [ 30 ] Development [ edit ] Game director Hiromichi Tanaka in 2007 Seiken Densetsu 3 was designed by series creator Koichi Ishii. The game was directed by Hiromichi Tanaka and produced by Tetsuhisa Tsuruzono. [ 31 ] Tanaka had previously worked on several titles for Square, including as a designer on the first three Final Fantasy titles. Manga and anime artist Nobuteru Yūki was responsible for the character concept artwork, based on designs by Ishii. [ 31 ] Yūki's artwork for the game can be found in the Nobuteru Yuki Seiken Densetsu Illustration Book . [ 32 ] During the game's development and after its release in Japan on September 30, 1995, Seiken Densetsu 3 became known abroad as Secret of Mana 2 , [ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] though a preview in Next Generation in August 1995 called it by its correct name, despite still stating it to be a sequel to Secret of Mana . [ 3 ] The preview noted the six characters, calendar system, and a game world "three to four times" the size of the previous game, though it also reported that the game would be playable by three players, not two. [ 3 ] Square stated in a 1995 issue of its North American newsletter that they planned to release the game during the second half of the year. [ 36 ] A second preview in Next Generation in February 1996, calling the game Secret of Mana 2 , stated that the game's North American release had been delayed by Square's American branch due to programming bugs but still listed the release date as Spring. [ 37 ] Seiken Densetsu 3 was never released outside Japan. Retro Gamer stated in 2011 that localizing the game for North America or Europe "would have cost a fortune", and that the rise of the competing PlayStation and Sega Saturn consoles diminished the benefits of spending so much on a Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES) game. [ 38 ] Nintendo Power , a few months after Seiken Densetsu 3 was released in Japan, said that the probability of a North American release for the game was low due to issues of "a technical nature" and that it would have been far too costly to produce at the time. [ 39 ] This is further supported by Brian Fehdrau, lead programmer for Square's contemporary game Secret of Evermore , who mentioned that Seiken Densetsu 3 had some software bugs , hindering its likelihood of being certified for release by Nintendo of America without extensive work. [ 40 ] There was an apparent misconception among video game fans that the SNES title Secret of Evermore was released in lieu of an English language version of Seiken Densetsu 3 in 1995. [ 41 ] [ 42 ] Secret of Evermore was developed by a new team at Square's office in Redmond, Washington called Square Soft. According to Fehdrau, no one who worked on the Evermore project would have been involved in a translation of Seiken Densetsu 3 ; the Redmond team was specifically hired to create Evermore . [ 40 ] In 2000, a fan translation project for Seiken Densetsu 3 led by Neill Corlett was successfully completed and made available on the internet as an unofficial patch , which could be applied to ROMs of the game when played with an emulator or played on a Super Nintendo console with a development kit or backup device. [ 43 ] Music [ edit ] Main article: Music of the Mana series Composer Hiroki Kikuta in 2011 Seiken Densetsu 3 Original Sound Version Soundtrack album by Hiroki Kikuta Released August 25, 1995 October 1, 2004 (reprint) Genre Video game soundtrack Length 3:19:21 Label NTT Publishing/Square Square Enix (reprint) The score for Seiken Densetsu 3 was composed by Hiroki Kikuta , who had previously composed the music for Secret of Mana as his first video game score. [ 44 ] Kikuta performed the sound selection, editing, effect design, and data encoding himself. Just as he did for Secret of Mana , Kikuta spent nearly 24 hours a day in his office, alternating between composing and editing to create a soundtrack that would be, according to him, "immersive" and "three-dimensional". [ 45 ] Similarly, rather than use premade MIDI samples of instruments like most game music composers of the time, Kikuta made his own MIDI samples that matched the hardware capabilities of the Super Nintendo so that he would know exactly how the pieces would sound on the system's hardware instead of having to deal with audio hardware differences between the original MIDI sampler and the SNES. [ 46 ] The soundtrack's music has been described by Freddie W. of RPGFan as "bouncy, energetic, flowing, and serene", and is noted for its use of piano and drums. [ 47 ] [ 48 ] He further called it a "more refined and matured" version of the Secret of Mana soundtrack. [ 47 ] The 1995 soundtrack album Seiken Densetsu 3 Original Sound Version collects 60 tracks of music from Seiken Densetsu 3 . It was published by NTT Publishing , and republished by Square Enix in 2004. [ 49 ] The main theme from Secret of Mana , "Angel's Fear", is also featured in Seiken Densetsu 3 as a part of "Where Angels Fear to Tread". [ 48 ] In addition to the original soundtrack album, an arranged album of music from Secret of Mana and Seiken Densetsu 3 was produced in 1993 as Secret of Mana+ . The music in the album was all composed and arranged by Kikuta. Secret of Mana+ contains a single track, titled "Secret of Mana", that incorporates themes from the music of both Secret of Mana and Seiken Densetsu 3 , which was still under development at the time. [ 50 ] The style of the album has been described by critics as "experimental", using "strange sounds" such as waterfalls, bird calls, cell phone sounds, and "typing" sounds. [ 51 ] Secret of Mana+ was originally published by NTT Publishing/Square, and was reprinted by NTT Publishing in 1995 and 2004. [ 51 ] The track "Meridian Child" from the original soundtrack was performed by the Tokyo Symphony Orchestra for the fifth Orchestral Game Concert in 1996. [ 52 ] "Meridian Child" was again performed on February 6, 2011, when the Eminence Symphony Orchestra played a concert in Tokyo as part of the Game Music Laboratory concert series as a tribute to the music of Kenji Ito and Hiroki Kikuta. [ 53 ] One of the companion books of sheet music for the Mana series, the first edition of Seiken Densetsu Best Collection Piano Solo Sheet Music , included pieces from Seiken Densetsu 3 , rewritten by Asako Niwa as beginning to intermediate level piano solos, though intended to sound like the originals. [ 54 ] Reception [ edit ] Reception Review scores Publication Score 1UP.com B– [ 41 ] Famitsu 31 / 40 [ 55 ] GameFan 95% [ 56 ] Nintendo Life [ 1 ] RPGamer 8 / 10 [ 5 ] Cubed3 9 / 10 [ 6 ] JeuxVideo.com 17 / 20 [ 4 ] Due to its Japanese exclusivity, most of the English-language reviews for Seiken Densetsu 3 were published years after the initial release. One contemporary English-language review was in 1995 in GameFan , which covered import games, and rated the game highly. [ 56 ] The Japanese Famitsu review also rated the game highly, though slightly lower than Secret of Mana . [ 55 ] [ 57 ] Critics have also rated the game highly in retrospective reviews, published mostly after the release of the fan translation patch in 2000. The graphics were praised; a review from 1UP.com called the game "absolutely gorgeous", which they attributed to its position towards the end of the era of 2D SNES games, but before developers tried to start working with prerendered 3D graphics. [ 41 ] A review by Chris Parsons of RPGamer agreed, terming the graphics "awesome" and positively comparing some of the effects to PlayStation RPGs, which the Cubed3 review by Adam Riley did as well. [ 5 ] [ 6 ] A preview by Next Generation written after the release of the game in Japan stated that the detailed graphics "puts just about every other recent 32-bit RPG to shame", while the review by Corbie Dillard of Nintendo Life also noted the game as one of the best graphically on the SNES and called out the unique visual styles of each area in the game as of particular note. [ 1 ] [ 37 ] The game's music was also generally praised; Nintendo Life ' s Dillard called it "spectacular from start to finish", while Cubed3 ' s Riley said it was "one of the most sonically pleasing out of the whole SNES lifetime" and RPGamer ' s Parsons said that "a wonderful job was done in the composition of the music". [ 1 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] The Next Generation preview praised both the quality of the soundtrack and the musical continuity from the Secret of Mana soundtrack. [ 37 ] The gameplay was highly rated by most reviewers, though the combat system had detractors. Dillard of Nintendo Life felt that the gameplay was as good as that of Secret of Mana and it had "a much more strategic feel to it". [ 1 ] The 1UP.com and Cubed3 reviews also brought up the day and time system as interesting additions, though the 1UP.com reviewer felt that the combat was not "quite as tight" as in Secret of Mana . [ 41 ] [ 6 ] The Next Generation preview, while acknowledging that several flaws in the Secret of Mana combat system had been corrected and praising the boss battles, felt that the computer-controlled characters showed no sense of tactics, resulting in a free-for-all. [ 37 ] A review by JeuxVideo.com also noted several improvements in the combat system over the prior game, but felt that battles could turn into a chaotic mass of attacks and numbers. [ 4 ] Parsons of RPGamer also called out the Ring system as being flawed, as he found it frustrating that the menu could not be brought up while a character was performing an action, making boss battles hectic and difficult. [ 5 ] The JeuxVideo.com reviewer also took issue with this restriction. [ 4 ] The plot received mixed reviews; while several reviewers praised the system of choosing different main characters, especially its effect on replayability, Cubed3 ' s Riley felt that it meant that the story "can be quite confusing". [ 6 ] Parsons noted that the interactions with the characters that were not chosen often left plot holes, as their motivations were not explained. [ 5 ] The Famitsu review praised the replayability of the branching narrative. [ 55 ] The Next Generation preview, while praising the multiple storylines as an innovation in the genre, felt that it had been attached to a "magic-and-monsters fantasy-formula" plot. [ 37 ] The 1UP.com reviewer agreed, saying that the plot was not "too terribly engaging", suffering from clichés and flat characters. [ 41 ] Overall, the game is regarded by many as a SNES classic; Nintendo Life ' s Dillard stated that it was "easily one of the best RPGs to come out of the 16-bit era", while the 1UP.com reviewer said that if it had been officially translated into English it "very likely would have become a fondly remembered classic". [ 1 ] [ 41 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Character names are taken from the Corlett translation References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Dillard, Corbie (2010-03-19). "Seiken Densetsu 3 (Super Nintendo) Review" . Nintendo Life . Archived from the original on 2014-03-11 . Retrieved 2014-03-11 . ^ Musashi (1999-02-22). "RPGFan Reviews - Secret of Mana" . RPGFan. Archived from the original on 2014-02-19 . Retrieved 2008-12-24 . ^ a b c "Seiken Densetsu 3". Next Generation (Imagine Media) 1 (8): 39. August 1995. ISSN 1078-9693 . ^ a b c d e f "Test du jeu Seiken Densetsu 3 sur SNES" . JeuxVideo.com (in French). L'Odyssée Interactive. 2010-08-20. Archived from the original on 2014-09-25 . Retrieved 2015-11-14 . ^ a b c d e f g h Parsons, Chris. "Seiken Densetsu 3 - Review" . RPGamer . Archived from the original on 2014-03-11 . Retrieved 2014-03-11 . ^ a b c d e f Riley, Adam (2006-10-03). "Seiken Densetsu 3 / Secret Of Mana 2" . Cubed3 . Archived from the original on 2013-12-31 . Retrieved 2014-03-11 . ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Narrator: Once, when the world was yet trapped in darkness, the goddess of Mana felled 8 incarnations of disaster that guided the world to destruction, the God Beasts, with the Sword of Mana, and sealed them in 8 stones. And, as the darkness left, the world was created. The goddess of Mana turned herself into a tree, and fell asleep. Many years passed... ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Narrator: Due to the actions of some who plot to unleash the God Beasts from the stones, obtain power surpassing even that of the gods, and to make the world their own, conflict breaks out heralding the end of peace... Mana is rapidly disappearing from the earth. Even the Mana Tree has begun to wither... ^ "Children of Mana Interview" . RPGamer . 2006-10-06. Archived from the original on 2014-08-26 . Retrieved 2007-06-09 . ^ Parish, Jeremy (2007-04-05). "Heroes of Mana Preview" . 1UP.com . Ziff Davis . Archived from the original on 2015-11-18 . Retrieved 2007-06-15 . ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Angela: My name is Angela... I'm the princess of Altena! [...] My mother was so cruel to me... she was about to trade my life for some stupid mana stone! [...] I didn't know where to go, so I headed out into the snowfield... [...] You mean Koren? The Wizard of the Red Lotus? Don't be stupid! [...] He and Mother tried to kill me! ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Narrator: Duran... Mercenary of the grasslands country, Forcena. His father, Loki, served the kingdom as one of the elite "Knights of Gold". But at a time in Duran's young days, Loki went away, never to be seen again[...] Prince Richard: Simone, I'm sorry... Loki was rushing in, trying to save me, and...he and the Dragon Emperor both fell into a bottomless pit... ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Knight: Last night a mysterious wizard infiltrated the castle and killed all the guards that were on duty except for Duran who just barely survived. ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Hawk: Navarre Kingdom? What is Lord Flamekhan up to? He's always taken pride in being a thief. Why would he go and do this all of a sudden? ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Eagle: Who is that? What did you do to Father!? [...] Isabella: Now boys, some things are better left secret. [...] Alright, no more fun and games. Bill: What's going on? ...Hawk!!! What did you do to Sir Eagle? [...] Isabella: Murdering your own friend is a serious offense... ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Lise: I am the princess of Rolante, and the leader of the Amazon army, after my late mother... The desert raiders of Navarre used Prince Eliott to infiltrate the castle... The winds that normally protect the castle, ceased... They used that opportunity to spread a sleeping powder through the castle... After that, they killed my father, the King, and kidnapped Eliott... ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Kevin: My precious friend, Karl... Karl and me, no mother, so always together... But on day... Karl attack me! After that, I dunno... my body feel real hot... When I came to... I killed Karl. I am beastman, but... not like the ones who attacked Jadd... My blood Half human... After meeting Karl, I learn about friendship, and trust... The beast King trick Karl into attacking me! My beastman blood... Karl... When I found out... I attack the Beast King... but no good... ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Carlie: Heath is a nice priest who took care of Carlie because she had no mama and Papa... grandpapa told Heath to go to Astoria! I don't want nothing to happen to my favorite Heath! So Mick helped me escape... But when I met Heath, a bad man kidnapped him! ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Old Man: This is the lakeshore village of Astoria. Woman with Blue Bonnet: The Holy City, Wendel, is on the other side of the lake. [...] Blond Hair Woman: The city of Jadd was taken over by Beastmen... what if they come here!? [...] Old Man: Did you see that light too? I've never seen anything like it in my life! Blue Hair Girl: Hey, inside that light... I thought I saw a little faerie... ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Faerie: My Priest, I have traveled here from the Mana Holy Land... The Mana Tree is starting to wither, the Mana is disappearing from the land... Priest of Light: A faerie has arrived from the holy land? This is a terrible portent! If the Mana Tree dies the eight God Beasts will awaken to reclaim this world! ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Priest of Light: That means you must go to the Mana Holy Land... you are the only one who can draw the Sword of Mana! Faerie: I'm sorry... but... the declining power of Mana makes it difficult for me... I have to be inside someone, in order to survive over this side... Duran: Okay... so, you're done with me, right? Now you can go inside the Priest or something... Priest of Light: It's not a simple, I'm afraid... Once the faerie chooses a host, it can't leave until the host dies... ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Priest of Light: If the sword is drawn before the Mana Tree dies, there may yet be hope... the Goddess will awaken and save the world. Your wishes may be granted as well. ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Priest of Light: There was once an ancient spell, which could control the Stones' energy... war erupted for control of the spell, and the world was torn apart... the bloodshed ended after a curse was put on the spell... making it to take the caster's life. The spell was lost soon after that. [...] Faerie: The eight spirits who guarded the Mana Stones... they could probably help us. With their combined energy, we may even be able to open the gate... ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Scholar: I've been studying the history of the Mana Stones. Long ago, there were eight Mana Stones, but today we only know the locations of seven of them. The missing one is the Mana Stone of Darkness. ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Duran: Almost there! Try it again! [...] Faerie: Thank you everyone, but the Mana isn't strong enough. I'm going to try one more time... Wait, no! It wasn't me! I didn't do anything! The gate opened itself...? This could only mean... the energy from the Mana Stones has been released! Their power combined with mine... that's why the gate rose up into the sky! ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Koren: If you want to see the queen, or the faerie, alive... hand over the Sword of Mana. [...] I'm going to take the Sword now. If you so much as move an inch, they're both dead. [...] Darkshine Knight: By the power of the Dragon Emperor, we will shape it into a dark blade... [...] We're wasting our time. Let us now released the God Beasts... [...] Faerie: Then it's begun... The Mana Stones are about to break apart... ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Faerie: This is a trap! We've been defeating the God Beasts in order to release their power... Now the Sword of Mana contains the power of all eight! Duran: Wait a minute... Are you saying we've been helping the enemy all along!? ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Dragon Emperor: The Sword... is no more. It's dark power now rests within me! [...] Goddess, you never know when to give up! This foolish attempt to stop me will fail, as well! ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Dragon Emperor: You leave me no choice! I'll cut down the Mana Tree, and that will be the end of it! [...] It is done! The Goddess of Mana is dead. [...] The Faeries are born of the Mana Tree... and with the Mana Tree they shall die. Observe, as a new world is born! ^ Square (1993-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 . Super Nintendo Entertainment System (fan translation). Square. Faerie: Thank you for not losing hope... but the Mana Tree is dead. Mana is gone from this world... No... don't worry. I will return someday... as the new Goddess. The Faerie is the Mana Tree's seed. When she meets the three Heroes... who believe in her... ...She becomes the new Goddess. Remember me... because a thousand years from now... Mana will return to your world. ^ a b Square (1995-09-30). Seiken Densetsu 3 (in Japanese). Super Nintendo Entertainment System . Square. ^ Yūki, Nobuteru (1995). Nobuteru Yuki Seiken Densetsu Illustration Book . Square . ^ West, Neil (September 1994). "Interview with Ted Woolsey" . Super Play ( Future plc ). ISSN 0966-6192 . Archived from the original on 2014-09-14. ^ "Feature: Chrono Cross Development Team Interview and Contest" . GamePro . IDG . 2000-12-01. Archived from the original on 2005-02-15 . Retrieved 2008-06-26 . ^ "Secret of Mana 2". GameFan (Diehard Gamers Club) 3 (12). December 1995. ISSN 1092-7212 . ^ "Around the Corner". Ogopogo Examiner ( Square ) (4). 1994. ^ a b c d e "Secret of Mana 2". Next Generation (Imagine Media) 2 (14): 120–121. February 1996. ISSN 1078-9693 . ^ Day, Ashley (February 2011). "Featured: The Secrets of Mana". Retro Gamer ( Imagine Publishing ) (85): 24–31. ISSN 1742-3155 . ^ "Epic Center: The Rising Sun". Nintendo Power ( Nintendo ) (79): 51. December 1995. ISSN 1041-9551 . ^ a b Dillard, Corbie (2009-04-01). "Interview with Brian Fehdrau (Secret of Evermore)" . Nintendo Life . Archived from the original on 2014-08-15 . Retrieved 2012-12-31 . ^ a b c d e f "Seiken Densetsu 3 Review" . 1UP.com . Ziff Davis . 2000-01-01. Archived from the original on 2015-11-18 . Retrieved 2014-03-11 . ^ "RPGFan Reviews - Secret of Evermore" . RPGFan . 2001-03-03. Archived from the original on 2014-07-24 . Retrieved 2008-06-28 . ^ Castro, Radford (2004-10-25). "The World of Emulation". Let Me Play: Stories of Gaming and Emulation . Hats Off Books. pp. 171–172. ISBN 1-58736-349-6 . ^ Jeriaska; Kikuta, Hiroki (2007-06-16). "Hiroki Kikuta: Lost Files Regained" . Square Haven . Archived from the original on 2014-01-17 . Retrieved 2009-11-17 . ^ Jeriaska; Yamamoto, Taka (2007-06-09). "Where Angels Fear to Tread: A Conversation with Hiroki Kikuta" . Square Haven . Archived from the original on 2014-01-17 . Retrieved 2007-06-15 . ^ Jeriaska (2009-08-31). "Interview: Magical Planet - The Music of Hiroki Kikuta & Yoko Shimomura" . Gamasutra . UBM . Archived from the original on 2013-10-29 . Retrieved 2009-09-01 . ^ a b W., Freddie (2000-06-10). "Seiken Densetsu 3 OSV" . RPGFan . Archived from the original on 2014-08-02 . Retrieved 2009-08-10 . ^ a b "Seiken Densetsu 3 Original Sound Version :: Review by Z-Freak" . Square Enix Music Online . Archived from the original on 2014-03-13 . Retrieved 2009-08-28 . ^ "Seiken Densetsu 3 Original Sound Version" . Square Enix Music Online . Archived from the original on 2014-03-13 . Retrieved 2008-06-25 . ^ Greening, Chris. "Secret of Mana + :: Review by Chris" . Square Enix Music Online . Archived from the original on 2014-01-17 . Retrieved 2009-08-28 . ^ a b Kalabakov, Daniel (2002-05-19). "Secret of Mana +" . RPGFan . Archived from the original on 2014-08-02 . Retrieved 2009-08-10 . ^ Game Music Concert 5 ~Live Best Collection~ (album). Sony Music Entertainment . 1996-01-21. ^ Napolitano, Jayson (2011-03-24). "Game Music Laboratory Unplugged Concert Feat. Hiroki Kikuta and Kenji Ito" . Original Sound Version . Archived from the original on 2014-08-02 . Retrieved 2011-03-28 . ^ "Mana Series :: Sheet Music Books" . Square Enix Music Online . Archived from the original on 2013-05-15 . Retrieved 2009-08-11 . ^ a b c 聖剣伝説3 [スーパーファミコン] [Seiken Densetsu 3 (Super Famicom)] . Famitsu (in Japanese). Enterbrain . Archived from the original on 2015-09-09 . Retrieved 2015-04-29 . ^ a b "Secret of Mana 2". GameFan (DieHard Gamers Club) (36). December 1995. ISSN 1092-7212 . ^ 読者が選ぶ心のベストゲーム100 . Weekly Famitsu (in Japanese) ( Enterbrain ) (900): 4. 2006-03-03. External links [ edit ] Book: Mana series Official site (Japanese) (via Internet Archive ) v t e Mana series Original series Final Fantasy Adventure Sword of Mana Adventures of Mana Secret of Mana Seiken Densetsu 3 Legend of Mana Rise of Mana World of Mana series Children of Mana Dawn of Mana Heroes of Mana Related Music Secret of Evermore
