Sport and recreation

/wiki/Expedition_to_the_Barrier_Peaks
Expedition to the Barrier Peaks
Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Cover with art by Erol Otus Code S3 Rules required Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 1st edition Character levels 8–12 Campaign setting Greyhawk Authors Gary Gygax First published 1980 Linked modules S1 • S2 • S3 • S4 Expedition to the Barrier Peaks is a 1980 adventure module for the Dungeons & Dragons roleplaying game written by Gary Gygax . While Dungeons & Dragons ( D&D ) is typically a fantasy game, the adventure includes elements of science fiction , and thus belongs to the science fantasy genre. [ 1 ] It takes place on a downed spaceship; the ship's crew has died of an unspecified disease, but functioning robots and strange creatures still inhabit the ship. The player characters fight monsters and robots, and gather the futuristic weapons and colored access cards that are necessary for advancing the story. Expedition to the Barrier Peaks was first played at the Origins II convention in 1976, where it was used to introduce Dungeons & Dragons players to the science fiction game Metamorphosis Alpha . In 1980, TSR published the adventure, updated for first edition Advanced Dungeons & Dragons rules. The adventure was not updated for later rules systems, but a Wizards.com article did provide a conversion to Future Tech . It included a separate booklet of illustrations, in both color and black and white. The adventure is an old-time favorite of many Dungeons & Dragons fans, including Stephen Colbert . [ 2 ] It was ranked the fifth-best Dungeons & Dragons adventure of all time by Dungeon magazine in 2004, and received positive reviews from White Dwarf and The Space Gamer magazines. The other adventures in the S series include S1 Tomb of Horrors , S2 White Plume Mountain , and S4 Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth . Contents 1 Plot summary 2 Publication history 3 Reception 4 References 5 External links Plot summary [ edit ] Expedition to the Barrier Peaks takes place on a spaceship in the Barrier Peaks mountain range of the World of Greyhawk campaign setting. [ 3 ] In the adventure's introduction, it is explained that the Grand Duchy of Geoff is under constant attack by a succession of monsters that have been emerging from a cave in the mountains. The Grand Duke of Geoff has hired the characters to discover the origin of the creatures, and stop their incursions. The cave is actually an entrance to a downed spacecraft whose inhabitants have succumbed to a virus, leaving them dead. Many of the ship's robots are still functioning, however, and the players must either avoid or defeat them; some may also be ignored. As later seen in video games, " plot coupons " need to be collected. The adventure requires the players to gather colored access cards (the "coupons") to advance to the next story arc: [ 4 ] entering restricted areas, commanding robots, and other actions are all dependent on the cards. Expedition to the Barrier Peaks comes with a booklet of 63 numbered illustrations, depicting the various monsters, high tech devices, and situations encountered in the adventure. Much of the artwork for the adventure, including the cover, was produced by Erol Otus . Several of his contributions were printed in full color. Jeff Dee , Greg K. Fleming, David S. LaForce , Jim Roslof and David C. Sutherland III provided additional illustrations for the adventure. [ 5 ] :29 Expedition to the Barrier Peaks's 32-page adventure guide is divided into six sections. These describe the crew's quarters, the lounge area, the gardens and menagerie , and the activity deck. Along the way, the characters find colored access cards and futuristic devices such as blaster rifles and suits of powered armor that they can use to aid their journey. The first two sections involve various monsters, vegepygmys —short humanoid plant creatures—who have commandeered the crew's quarters, and a repair robot that follows instructions before its batteries run out. There is also a medical robot trying in vain to find a cure for the virus that killed the ship's crew. In the lounge area, a "Dining Servo Robot" still works, although the "food" it serves is now moldy poison. The gardens and menagerie area includes an encounter with a "cute little bunnyoid on the stump". [ 5 ] :15 It looks like a horned rabbit on a tree stump, but when approached, the stump develops fangs and its roots become tentacles , which it then uses to attack the characters. The next encounter involves a froghemoth, a large alien frog-like creature with tentacles and three eyes on an eyestalk. In the sixth and final section, the activity deck, the players' characters must contend with various sports robots, including a "boxing and wrestling trainer" and a "karate master". [ 5 ] :18 If the characters can communicate with the karate master and tell it that boxing is superior to karate, it will attack the boxing robot until both are destroyed, else they will both attack the characters. The last area of the activity deck is the loading area, where the characters can leave the spaceship. The adventure then ends, with no postscript. Publication history [ edit ] Author Gary Gygax in 2007 at the GenCon game convention While D&D is a fantasy roleplaying game, Expedition to the Barrier Peaks introduces science fiction elements into the game. [ 1 ] [ 6 ] Work on the adventure began in 1976, when TSR was considering publishing a science fantasy role playing game . James M. Ward had shown them his rough notes on Metamorphosis Alpha . Gary Gygax thought it would be a good idea to introduce science fiction/science fantasy concepts to D&D players through the use of a tournament scenario at the 1976 Origins II gaming convention in Baltimore, Maryland. Gygax started with his old Greyhawk Castle campaign material and added a spaceship, which Rob Kuntz helped him populate with monsters. [ 5 ] :2 [ 7 ] Kuntz is further credited for "inspiration" for the module; his "Machine Level" having been incorporated into Greyhawk Castle [ 8 ] and Tim Kask having played in a D&D game with science fantasy content run by Kuntz at GenCon VII in 1974. [ 9 ] According to Gygax, both the scenario that became Expedition to the Barrier Peaks and Metamorphosis Alpha were successful at the convention. Although Metamorphosis Alpha became available to the general public in mid-1976, only a few copies of the Expedition to the Barrier Peaks tournament adventure survived after the convention. [ 5 ] :2 When Metamorphosis Alpha was updated and expanded into Gamma World , it seemed the right time for Gygax to reintroduce Expedition to the Barrier Peaks to the public. Said Gygax, "What could be more logical than to make available a scenario which blends the two role playing approaches into a single form?" [ 5 ] :2 Gygax updated the scenario to Advanced Dungeons & Dragons (AD&D) rules, hoping it could serve as a primer on how to integrate science into one's fantasy role playing game. [ 5 ] :2 In 1980, the updated version was published as Expedition to the Barrier Peaks . At the time of Expedition to the Barrier Peaks' s release, each Dungeons & Dragons module was marked with an alphanumeric code indicating the series to which it belonged. [ 10 ] The 32-page adventure bears the code S3 ("S" for "special"). [ 10 ] The module included a 36-page book and a 32-page book, with two outer folders; it was one of the first deluxe scenario modules, and included a book of illustrations intended to be shown to the players during the game, including four color paintings. [ 6 ] This module was included as part of the Realms of Horror abridged compilation produced in 1987. Although an article on the Wizards.com web site did provide a conversion to Future Tech , the adventure never received an official sequel and was not updated for the D&D version 3.5 rules [ 7 ] (Wizards of the Coast periodically alters the rules of Dungeons & Dragons and releases a new version). [ 11 ] It was made into a novel of the same name by Roland J. Green for the Greyhawk Classics series . [ 12 ] The adventure has also been referenced in the Nodwick comic series. [ 13 ] Unlike the other S series adventures, Expedition to the Barrier Peaks was not included in the Dungeon Survival Guide by author Bill Slavicsek because to him it was a "wonderful adventure", but not "a D&D adventure. Once you add ray guns and power armor to the game, you have a fundamentally different experience." [ 14 ] Other products that have introduced futuristic elements into D&D include the adventure City of the Gods (1987) and the novel Tale of the Comet (1997). [ 15 ] All four modules of the S-series were included as part of the Dungeons of Dread hardcover collection, released on March 19, 2013. [ 16 ] Lawrence Schick wrote in the foreword: "Vegepygmies and robots. What more could you need to hear? Let’s go! S3 Expedition to the Barrier Peaks was Gary in full-on funhouse mode, having a high old time mixing elements of Jim Ward's Gamma World with fantasy to create a rollicking and memorable AD&D adventure." [ 17 ] Reception [ edit ] Expedition to the Barrier Peaks received favorable reviews and was ranked the 5th greatest Dungeons & Dragons adventure of all time by Dungeon magazine in 2004, on the 30th anniversary of the Dungeons & Dragons game. Judge Bill Slavicsek felt the adventure was a "classic clash of genres". It was not something he felt should be done often, but it made a "memorable diversion". Judge Mike Mearls described how he felt the first time he read Expedition to the Barrier Peaks . "I had this terrible, terrible conflict within myself to immediately tell my friends about it at war with a maniacal, desperate drive to keep it hidden at all costs." Judge Keith Baker was most impressed with the adventure's art. He liked that it came with a separate book of art; in particular the before and after illustrations of the carnivorous plant with a "built-in bunny lure". [ 18 ] This was later featured in a Wizards.com "Ask Wizards" segment. [ 19 ] According to the Dungeon editors, the adventure's defining moment was its froghemoth creature, and its full page color illustration. [ 18 ] Two gaming magazines reviewed Expedition to the Barrier Peaks in 1981. Reviewer Marcus L. Rowland said in White Dwarf #26 that he found the adventure "very enjoyable, with ideas and creatures eminently suitable for wider use". He gave it 9/10 overall, but complained that some of the maps were printed on both sides of the same sheet, making them useless as a Dungeon Master 's shield [ 20 ] (a visual barrier that allows dice rolls and other activities to be conducted without the players knowing the outcome [ 21 ] ). He recommended at least a week's study by the Dungeon Master before attempting to play it. He also notes that the cover "reveals the secret of the creatures". [ 20 ] Kirby Griffis reviewed the adventure in The Space Gamer #36. Griffis noted that it is full of "surprises and new monsters", and felt that its one drawback was that Gygax presented standard D&D monsters as natives of other planets. In summary, he found it interesting and "full of spice and flavor"; recommending it to anyone interested in "something new" or wanting to include science fiction in their D&D game. [ 22 ] According to Creighton Broadhurst, author of Exemplars of Evil: Deadly Foes to Vex Your Heroes , the adventure is one of the most popular "old time" Greyhawk adventures. [ 23 ] Game designer Daniel Kaufman remembers "the famous backward-firing guns" as one of the adventure's highlights, [ 24 ] and Stephen Colbert , who played Dungeons & Dragons as a child, chose this adventure as his personal favorite. [ 25 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Livingstone, Ian (1982). Dicing with Dragons . Routledge. p. 127. ISBN 0-7100-9466-3 . ^ Rausch, Allen (2004-08-17). "Stephen Colbert on D&D" . Game Spy . ^ La Farge, Paul (September 2006). "Destroy All Monsters" . The Believer Magazine . Archived from the original on October 4, 2008. ^ Baur, Wolfgang (September 8, 2006). "Copper Bits and Gleaming Hoards" . Wizards of the Coast . Retrieved February 14, 2009 . ^ a b c d e f g Gygax, Gary (1980). Expedition to the Barrier Peaks . TSR . ISBN 0-935696-14-8 . ^ a b Schick, Lawrence (1991). Heroic Worlds . Prometheus Books . p. 113. ISBN 0-87975-653-5 . ^ a b Canavan, William (May 5, 2006). "Return Expedition to the Barrier Peaks" . Wizards of the Coast . Retrieved February 3, 2009 . ^ Robert J. Kuntz & Allan T. Grohe, Jr. (2001). "A Partial, Annotated Bibliography of the Works of Robert J. Kuntz" . Retrieved October 12, 2009 . ^ Tim Kask & James Maliszewski (2008). "Interview: Tim Kask (Part I)" . Retrieved October 12, 2009 . ^ a b "Dungeons & Dragons FAQ" . Wizards of the Coast . 2003 . Retrieved February 9, 2009 . ^ Pesca, Mike (June 12, 2008). "Is Dungeon & Dragons Too Popular for its Fans?" . National Public Radio . Retrieved August 3, 2009 . ^ Expedition to the Barrier Peaks (November 2000), by Roland J. Green , ( ISBN 0-7869-1656-7 ) ^ "The S-Series D&D Alumni" . Wizards of the Coast. November 15, 2007 . Retrieved July 22, 2009 . ^ "Dungeon Survival Guide" . Wizards of the Coast. October 19, 2007 . Retrieved July 22, 2009 . ^ Canavan, William (October 20, 2006). "Future Tech Meets Fantasy" . Wizards of the Coast . Retrieved February 14, 2009 . ^ "Dungeons of Dread" . Wizards of the Coast . Retrieved June 22, 2013 . ^ "Dungeons of Dread: Barrier Peaks" . Wizards of the Coast . Retrieved June 22, 2013 . ^ a b Mona, Erik ; James Jacobs (2004). "The 30 Greatest D&D Adventures of All Time". Dungeon ( Paizo Publishing ) (116): 78. ^ "Ask Wizards: 05/05/2006" . Wizards of the Coast . Retrieved February 5, 2009 . ^ a b Rowland, Marcus (August 1981). "Open Box". White Dwarf ( Games Workshop ) (26): 11. ^ "Dungeon Master’s Screen" . Wizards of the Coast . Retrieved August 1, 2009 . ^ Griffis, Kirby (February 1981). "Capsule Reviews". The Space Gamer ( Steve Jackson Games ) (36): 24. ^ Broadhurst, Creighton. "April Fools: Introducing Living GreyForce" . Wizards of the Coast . Retrieved February 5, 2009 . ^ Ryan, Michael (June 7, 2002). "Book of Challenges Spotlight" . Wizards of the Coast . Retrieved February 5, 2009 . ^ Colbert, Stephen (August 17, 2004). "Stephen Colbert on D&D " . GameSpy . Retrieved February 3, 2009 . External links [ edit ] The Pen-Paper.net entry on Expedition to the Barrier Peaks The Acaeum's entry on the "S" series of modules v t e Dungeons & Dragons rulebooks and accessories Original Dungeons & Dragons Core Dungeons & Dragons Chainmail Supplements Supplement I: Greyhawk Supplement II: Blackmoor Supplement III: Eldritch Wizardry Supplement IV: Gods, Demi-Gods, and Heroes Swords & Spells Basic Dungeons & Dragons Core Basic Set Expert Set Companion Set Master Rules Immortals Rules Dungeons & Dragons Game (1991) Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Creature Catalogue The Shady Dragon Inn Modules Adventures in Blackmoor Castle Amber Castle Caldwell and Beyond City of the Gods Combat Shield and Mini-adventure Curse of Xanathon Death's Ride The Duchy of Ten Earthshaker! The Endless Stair The Gem and the Staff Ghost of Lion Castle Horror on the Hill In Search of Adventure In Search of the Unknown The Isle of Dread The Jade Hare The Keep on the Borderlands The Kidnapping of Princess Arelina Legacy of Blood The Lost City Master Player Screen Mystery of the Snow Pearls Night's Dark Terror Palace of the Silver Princess Queen's Harvest Rahasia The Revenge of Rusak Sabre River Temple of the Frog Test of the Warlords The Tree of Life The Veiled Society War Rafts of Kron Where Chaos Reigns Advanced Dungeons & Dragons Core Players Handbook Dungeon Masters Guide Monster Manual Supplements Deities & Demigods Dragonlance Adventures Dungeoneer's Survival Guide Empires of the Sands Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Set Greyhawk Adventures Lords of Darkness The Magister Manual of the Planes Monster Manual II Moonshae Oriental Adventures The Savage Frontier Unearthed Arcana Waterdeep and the North Wilderness Survival Guide World of Greyhawk Fantasy Game Setting Modules Against the Cult of the Reptile God Against the Giants The Assassin's Knot Assault on the Aerie of the Slave Lords The Bane of Llywelyn Beyond the Crystal Cave Blood of the Yakuza Bloodstone Pass The Bloodstone Wars Castle Greyhawk Conan Against Darkness! Conan Unchained! Danger at Dunwater Day of Al'Akbar Deep Dwarven Delve Descent into the Depths of the Earth Dragonlance modules Dragons of Despair Dungeonland Dwellers of the Forbidden City The Final Enemy The Forest Oracle Forgotten Temple of Tharizdun The Gauntlet The Ghost Tower of Inverness Glacial Rift of the Frost Giant Jarl Hall of the Fire Giant King The Hidden Shrine of Tamoachan In the Dungeons of the Slave Lords Isle of the Ape The Land Beyond the Magic Mirror Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth The Lost Island of Castanamir Lost Tomb of Martek The Mines of Bloodstone Oasis of the White Palm Pharaoh Queen of the Demonweb Pits Queen of the Spiders Ravager of Time Ravenloft Ravenloft II: The House on Gryphon Hill Red Sonja Unconquered Ruins of Adventure Scourge of the Slave Lords The Secret of Bone Hill Secret of the Slavers Stockade The Sentinel Shrine of the Kuo-Toa Sinister Secret of Saltmarsh Slave Pits of the Undercity Steading of the Hill Giant Chief Swords of Deceit Swords of the Undercity The Temple of Elemental Evil The Throne of Bloodstone To Find a King Tomb of Horrors Tomb of the Lizard King Treasure Hunt Under Illefarn Vault of the Drow The Village of Hommlet White Plume Mountain Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monstrous Compendium/Monstrous Manual Supplements Anauroch Arms and Equipment Guide Book of Artifacts The Code of the Harpers The Complete Book of Dwarves The Complete Book of Humanoids The Complete Psionics Handbook The Dalelands Demihuman Deities Draconomicon Drow of the Underdark Dwarves Deep Earth, Air, Fire, and Water Faiths & Avatars Forgotten Realms Adventures The Forgotten Realms Atlas Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting From the Ashes Greyhawk: The Adventure Begins A Guide to the Astral Plane Hall of Heroes Heroes' Lorebook Iuz the Evil Jungles of Chult Legends & Lore The Marklands Monster Mythology Old Empires Ruins of Undermountain The Shining South Tome of Magic Villains' Lorebook Adventures Against the Giants: The Liberation of Geoff The Bloodstone Lands Border Watch The City of Skulls Crypt of Lyzandred the Mad Die Vecna Die! The Doomgrinder Doom of Daggerdale Fate of Istus Five Shall Be One Gargoyle Greyhawk Ruins Halls of the High King House of Strahd Howl from the North Mordenkainen's Fantastic Adventure Night Below: An Underdark Campaign Patriots of Ulek Rary the Traitor Return of the Eight Return to the Keep on the Borderlands Return to the Tomb of Horrors Return to White Plume Mountain Slavers The Star Cairns Treasures of Greyhawk Vecna Lives! Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Book of Challenges Book of Vile Darkness Defenders of the Faith Deities and Demigods Enemies and Allies Epic Level Handbook Faiths and Pantheons Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Ghostwalk Hero Builder's Guidebook Living Greyhawk Gazetteer Lords of Darkness Magic of Faerûn Monsters of Faerûn Manual of the Planes Masters of the Wild Monster Manual II Oriental Adventures Psionics Handbook Races of Faerûn Savage Species Song and Silence Stronghold Builder's Guidebook Sword and Fist Tome and Blood Adventures City of the Spider Queen The Fright at Tristor Return to the Temple of Elemental Evil Dungeons & Dragons v3.5 Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Dungeons & Dragons Basic Game Supplements An Adventurer's Guide to Eberron Book of Exalted Deeds City of Splendors: Waterdeep City of Stormreach Cityscape Complete Adventurer Complete Arcane Complete Champion Complete Divine Complete Mage Complete Psionic Complete Scoundrel Complete Warrior Draconomicon Dragon Magic Dragonmarked Dragons of Eberron Dragons of Faerûn Drow of the Underdark Dungeon Master's Guide II Dungeonscape Eberron Campaign Setting Elder Evils Expanded Psionics Handbook Faiths of Eberron Fiendish Codex I: Hordes of the Abyss Fiendish Codex II: Tyrants of the Nine Hells Five Nations The Forge of War Frostburn The Grand History of the Realms Heroes of Battle Heroes of Horror Libris Mortis Lords of Madness Lost Empires of Faerûn Magic Item Compendium Magic of Incarnum Miniatures Handbook Monster Manual III Monster Manual IV Monster Manual V Planar Handbook Player's Handbook II Races of Destiny Races of the Dragon Races of Stone Races of the Wild Sandstorm Spell Compendium Stormwrack Tome of Battle Tome of Magic Underdark Unearthed Arcana Weapons of Legacy Adventures Expedition to Castle Ravenloft Expedition to the Demonweb Pits Expedition to the Ruins of Greyhawk Fantastic Locations: Dragondown Grotto Red Hand of Doom Dungeons & Dragons 4th edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Supplements Arcane Power Divine Power Dark Sun Campaign Setting Dungeon Master's Guide 2 Draconomicon: Chromatic Dragons Draconomicon: Metallic Dragons Eberron Campaign Guide Eberron Player's Guide Forgotten Realms Campaign Guide Forgotten Realms Player's Guide Manual of the Planes Martial Power Martial Power 2 Monster Manual 2 Monster Manual 3 Player's Handbook 2 Player's Handbook 3 Primal Power Psionic Power Adventures Assault on Nightwyrm Fortress Demon Queen's Enclave Keep on the Shadowfell King of the Trollhaunt Warrens Pyramid of Shadows Thunderspire Labyrinth Dungeons & Dragons 5th edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Supplements Elemental Evil Player's Companion Sword Coast Adventurer's Guide Adventures Hoard of the Dragon Queen Rise of Tiamat Princes of the Apocalypse Out of the Abyss General Dragon Dungeon v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Miniatures Creators Dave Arneson Keith Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Gary Gygax Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies Grenadier Models Hasbro Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations TSR Wizards of the Coast Licenses Game System License Open Game License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Al-Qadim Birthright Blackmoor Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Eberron Forgotten Realms Ghostwalk Greyhawk Kara-Tur Mystara Planescape Ravenloft Spelljammer Worlds Abeir-Toril Eberron Krynn Mystara Oerth Underdark Planes of existence Prime Material Plane Inner Planes Outer Planes Far Realm Plane of Shadow Player characters Races Dragonborn Dwarf Eladrin Elf Gnome Halfling Half-elf Half-orc Human Tiefling Classes Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Magic-User/Mage/Wizard Monk/Mystic Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Thief/Rogue Warlock List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Forgotten Realms Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Iggwilv Raistlin Majere Mordenkainen Lord Soth Strahd von Zarovich Beasts and other beings Creatures and monsters Creature types Aberration Celestials Constructs Deathless Draconic creatures Dragons Chromatic dragon Metallic dragon Elementals Fey Fiends Giants Humanoids Lycanthropes Magical beasts Monstrous humanoids Oozes Outsiders Plants Undead Notable Beholder Drow (dark elf) Githyanki Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Lists by edition Original Classic AD&D 1st edition AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 D&D 4th edition D&D 5th edition List of monsters A B Deities and powers Human and Demihuman Human Dwarven deities Elven deities (Seldarine) Gnome deities Halfling deities Monster Archdevils Demon lords Dragon deities Drow deities (Dark Seldarine) Fey deities (Seelie Court) Giant deities Goblinoid deities Orc deities Lists by setting Dragonlance deities Forgotten Realms deities Greyhawk deities Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic rule sets Dungeons & Dragons (Original) Basic Set Expert Companion Master Immortals Classic Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Periodicals Dragon Dungeon Adventures Imagine Living Greyhawk Journal Polyhedron Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Video games Early games (1975–1983) dnd Dungeon D&D Computer Labyrinth Game D&D Computer Fantasy Game AD&D: Cloudy Mountain AD&D: Treasure of Tarmin Baldur's Gate series Bhaalspawn Saga Baldur's Gate Tales of the Sword Coast Enhanced Edition Siege of Dragonspear Baldur's Gate II: Shadows of Amn Throne of Bhaal Enhanced Edition Dark Alliance Baldur's Gate: Dark Alliance Baldur's Gate: Dark Alliance II Icewind Dale series Icewind Dale Heart of Winter Icewind Dale: Enhanced Edition Icewind Dale II Neverwinter Nights series Neverwinter Nights Shadows of Undrentide Hordes of the Underdark Kingmaker Pirates of the Sword Coast Infinite Dungeons Darkness over Daggerford Wyvern Crown of Cormyr Neverwinter Nights 2 Mask of the Betrayer Storm of Zehir Mysteries of Westgate List of characters Pool of Radiance series Pool of Radiance Curse of the Azure Bonds Secret of the Silver Blades Pools of Darkness Ruins of Myth Drannor Savage Frontier series Gateway to the Savage Frontier Neverwinter Nights Treasures of the Savage Frontier Other games by campaign setting Dark Sun Dark Sun: Shattered Lands Dark Sun: Wake of the Ravager Dark Sun Online: Crimson Sands Dragonlance Heroes of the Lance Dragons of Flame War of the Lance DragonStrike Shadow Sorcerer Champions of Krynn Death Knights of Krynn The Dark Queen of Krynn Eberron D&D: Dragonshard D&D Online: Stormreach Forgotten Realms Hillsfar Eye of the Beholder Eye of the Beholder II: The Legend of Darkmoon Dungeon Hack Unlimited Adventures Menzoberranzan Blood & Magic Descent to Undermountain Demon Stone Daggerdale Neverwinter Lords of Waterdeep Sword Coast Legends Mystara Order of the Griffon Warriors of the Eternal Sun Fantasy Empires Tower of Doom Shadow over Mystara Collection Chronicles of Mystara Ravenloft Ravenloft: Strahd's Possession Ravenloft: Stone Prophet Iron & Blood: Warriors of Ravenloft Various settings Spelljammer: Pirates of Realmspace D&D: Stronghold AD&D: Slayer DeathKeep Al-Qadim: The Genie's Curse Birthright: The Gorgon's Alliance Planescape: Torment D&D: Heroes The Temple of Elemental Evil D&D: Tactics
