Literature and theatre

/wiki/Hamlet
Hamlet
This article is about the play by William Shakespeare.  For other uses, see Hamlet (disambiguation) . The American actor Edwin Booth as Hamlet , ca. 1870 The Tragedy of Hamlet, Prince of Denmark , often shortened to Hamlet ( / ˈ h æ m l ᵻ t / ), is a tragedy written by William Shakespeare at an uncertain date between 1599 and 1602. Set in the Kingdom of Denmark , the play dramatises the revenge Prince Hamlet is called to wreak upon his uncle, Claudius by the ghost of Hamlet's father, King Hamlet . Claudius had murdered his own brother and seized the throne, also marrying his deceased brother's widow. Hamlet is Shakespeare's longest play, and is among the most powerful and influential tragedies in English literature, with a story capable of "seemingly endless retelling and adaptation by others." [ 1 ] The play likely was one of Shakespeare's most popular works during his lifetime, [ 2 ] and still ranks among his most performed, topping the performance list of the Royal Shakespeare Company and its predecessors in Stratford-upon-Avon since 1879. [ 3 ] It has inspired many other writers – from Goethe and Dickens to Joyce and Murdoch – and has been described as "the world's most filmed story after Cinderella ". [ 4 ] The story of Shakespeare's Hamlet was derived from the legend of Amleth , preserved by 13th-century chronicler Saxo Grammaticus in his Gesta Danorum , as subsequently retold by 16th-century scholar François de Belleforest . Shakespeare may also have drawn on an earlier (hypothetical) Elizabethan play known today as the Ur-Hamlet , though some scholars believe he himself wrote the Ur-Hamlet , later revising it to create the version of Hamlet we now have. He almost certainly wrote his version of the title role for his fellow actor, Richard Burbage , the leading tragedian of Shakespeare's time. [ 5 ] In the 400 years since its inception, the role has been performed by numerous highly acclaimed actors in each successive century. Three different early versions of the play are extant: the First Quarto (Q1, 1603); the Second Quarto (Q2, 1604); and the First Folio (F1, 1623). Each version includes lines and entire scenes missing from the others. The play's structure and depth of characterisation have inspired much critical scrutiny. One such example is the centuries-old debate about Hamlet's hesitation to kill his uncle, which some see as merely a plot device to prolong the action, but which others argue is a dramatisation of the complex philosophical and ethical issues that surround cold-blooded murder, calculated revenge, and thwarted desire. More recently, psychoanalytic critics have examined Hamlet's unconscious desires , while feminist critics have re-evaluated and attempted to rehabilitate the often maligned characters of Ophelia and Gertrude . Contents 1 Characters 2 Plot 3 Sources 4 Date 5 Texts 6 Analysis and criticism 6.1 Critical history 6.2 Dramatic structure 6.3 Language 7 Context and interpretation 7.1 Religious 7.2 Philosophical 7.3 Psychoanalytic 7.4 Feminist 8 Influence 9 Performance history 9.1 Shakespeare's day to the Interregnum 9.2 Restoration and 18th century 9.3 19th century 9.4 20th century 9.5 21st century 9.6 Film and TV performances 10 Stage pastiches 11 See also 12 References 12.1 Notes 12.2 Editions of Hamlet 12.3 Secondary sources 13 External links Characters [ edit ] Hamlet – Son of the late King and nephew of the present king Claudius – King of Denmark and Hamlet's uncle Gertrude – Queen of Denmark and mother to Hamlet Polonius – Chief counsellor to the king Ophelia – Daughter to Polonius Horatio – True friend to Hamlet Laertes – Son to Polonius Voltimand and Cornelius – Courtiers Rosencrantz and Guildenstern – Courtiers, friends to Hamlet Osric – a Courtier Marcellus – an Officer Bernardo – an Officer Francisco – a Soldier Reynaldo – Servant to Polonius Ghost of Hamlet's Father Fortinbras – Prince of Norway Gravediggers – a Sexton Player King, Player Queen, Lucianus etc. – Players A Priest A Captain in Fortinbras' army English Ambassadors Messengers, Sailors, Lords, Ladies, Guards, Danes (supporters of Laertes) Plot [ edit ] For cast overview, see Characters in Hamlet . The protagonist of Hamlet is Prince Hamlet of Denmark, son of the recently deceased King Hamlet , and nephew of King Claudius , his father's brother and successor. Claudius hastily married King Hamlet's widow, Gertrude , Hamlet's mother, and took the throne for himself. Denmark has a long-standing feud with neighboring Norway, which culminated when King Hamlet slew King Fortinbras of Norway in a battle years ago. Although Denmark defeated Norway, and the Norwegian throne fell to King Fortinbras's infirm brother, Denmark fears that an invasion led by the dead Norwegian king's son, Prince Fortinbras , is imminent. The play opens on a cold night on the ramparts of Elsinore , the Danish royal castle. The sentries Bernardo and Marcellus and Hamlet's friend Horatio encounter a ghost that looks like the late King Hamlet. They vow to tell Prince Hamlet what they have witnessed. As the Court gathers the next day, while King Claudius and Queen Gertrude discuss affairs of state with their elderly adviser Polonius , Hamlet looks on glumly. After the Court exits, Hamlet despairs of his father's death and his mother's hasty remarriage. Learning of the Ghost from Horatio, Hamlet resolves to see it himself. Horatio, Hamlet, and the Ghost (Artist: Henry Fuseli , 1789) [ 6 ] As Polonius's son Laertes prepares to depart for a visit to France, Polonius gives him contradictory advice that culminates in the ironic maxim "to thine own self be true." Polonius's daughter, Ophelia , admits her interest in Hamlet, but both Polonius and Laertes warn her against seeking the prince's attention. That night on the rampart, the Ghost appears to Hamlet, telling the prince that he was murdered by Claudius and demanding that Hamlet avenge him. Hamlet agrees and the Ghost vanishes. The prince confides to Horatio and the sentries that from now on he plans to "put an antic disposition on" and forces them to swear to keep his plans for revenge secret. Privately, however, he remains uncertain of the Ghost's reliability. Soon thereafter, Ophelia rushes to her father, telling him that Hamlet arrived at her door the prior night half-undressed and behaving crazily. Polonius blames love for Hamlet's madness and resolves to inform Claudius and Gertrude. As he enters to do so, the king and queen finish welcoming Rosencrantz and Guildenstern , two student acquaintances of Hamlet, to Elsinore. The royal couple has requested that the students investigate the cause of Hamlet's mood and behavior. Additional news requires that Polonius wait to be heard: messengers from Norway inform Claudius that the King of Norway has rebuked Prince Fortinbras for attempting to re-fight his father's battles. The forces that Fortinbras conscripted to march against Denmark will instead be sent against Poland, though they will pass through a portion of Denmark to get there. Polonius tells Claudius and Gertrude his theory regarding Hamlet's behavior, and speaks to Hamlet in a hall of the castle to try to uncover more information. Hamlet feigns madness but subtly insults Polonius all the while. When Rosencrantz and Guildenstern arrive, Hamlet greets his friends warmly, but quickly discerns that they are spies. Hamlet becomes bitter, admitting that he is upset at his situation but refusing to give the true reason why, instead commenting on " what a piece of work " humanity is. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern tell Hamlet that they have brought along a troupe of actors that they met while traveling to Elsinore. Hamlet, after welcoming the actors and dismissing his friends-turned-spies, plots to stage a play featuring a death in the style of his father's murder, thereby determining the truth of the Ghost's story, as well as Claudius's guilt or innocence, by studying Claudius's reaction. Polonius forces Ophelia to return Hamlet's love letters and tokens of affection to the prince while he and Claudius watch from afar to evaluate Hamlet's reaction. Hamlet is walking alone in the hall as the King and Polonius await Ophelia's entrance, musing whether " to be or not to be ." When Ophelia enters and tries to return Hamlet's things, Hamlet accuses her of immodesty and cries "get thee to a nunnery," though it is unclear whether this, too, is a show of madness or genuine distress. His reaction convinces Claudius that Hamlet is not mad for love. Shortly thereafter, the court assembles to watch the play Hamlet has commissioned. After seeing the Player King murdered by his rival pouring poison in his ear, Claudius abruptly rises and runs from the room: proof positive for Hamlet of his uncle's guilt. Hamlet mistakenly stabs Polonius (Artist: Coke Smyth, 19th century). Gertrude summons Hamlet to her room to demand an explanation. Meanwhile, Claudius talks to himself about the impossibility of repenting, since he still has possession of his ill-gotten goods: his brother's crown and wife. He sinks to his knees. Hamlet, on his way to visit his mother, sneaks up behind him, but does not kill him, reasoning that killing Claudius while he is praying will send him straight to heaven while the Ghost is stuck in purgatory. In the queen's bedchamber, Hamlet and Gertrude fight bitterly. Polonius, spying on the conversation from behind a tapestry , makes a noise. Hamlet, believing it is Claudius, stabs wildly, killing Polonius, but pulls aside the curtain and sees his mistake. In a rage, Hamlet brutally insults his mother for her apparent ignorance of Claudius's villainy, but the Ghost enters and reprimands Hamlet for his inaction and harsh words. Unable to see or hear the Ghost herself, Gertrude takes Hamlet's conversation with it as further evidence of madness. After begging the queen to stop sleeping with Claudius, Hamlet leaves, dragging Polonius's corpse away. Hamlet jokes with Claudius about where he has hidden Polonius's body, and the king, fearing for his life, sends Rosencrantz and Guildenstern to accompany Hamlet to England with a sealed letter to the English king requesting that Hamlet be executed immediately. Demented by grief at Polonius's death, Ophelia wanders Elsinore. Laertes arrives back from France, enraged by his father's death and his sister's madness. Claudius convinces Laertes that Hamlet is solely responsible, but a letter soon arrives indicating that Hamlet has returned to Denmark, foiling Claudius's plan. Claudius switches tactics, proposing a fencing match between Laertes and Hamlet to settle their differences. Laertes will be given a poison-tipped foil, and Claudius will offer Hamlet poisoned wine as a congratulation if that fails. Gertrude interrupts to report that Ophelia has drowned, though it is unclear whether it was suicide or an accident exacerbated by her madness. The "gravedigger scene" [ 7 ] (Artist: Eugène Delacroix , 1839) Horatio has received a letter from Hamlet, explaining that the prince escaped by negotiating with pirates who attempted to attack his England-bound ship, and the friends reunite offstage. Two gravediggers discuss Ophelia's apparent suicide while digging her grave. Hamlet arrives with Horatio and banters with one of the gravediggers, who unearths the skull of a jester from Hamlet's childhood, Yorick . Hamlet picks up the skull, saying "alas, poor Yorick" as he contemplates mortality. Ophelia's funeral procession approaches, led by Laertes. Hamlet and Horatio initially hide, but when Hamlet realizes that Ophelia is the one being buried, he reveals himself, proclaiming his love for her. Laertes and Hamlet fight by Ophelia's graveside, but the brawl is broken up. Back at Elsinore, Hamlet explains to Horatio that he had discovered Claudius's letter with Rosencrantz and Guildenstern's belongings and replaced it with a forged copy indicating that his former friends should be killed instead. A foppish courtier, Osric , interrupts the conversation to deliver the fencing challenge to Hamlet. Hamlet, despite Horatio's advice, accepts it. Hamlet does well at first, leading the match by two hits to none, and Gertrude raises a toast to him using the poisoned glass of wine Claudius had set aside for Hamlet. Claudius tries to stop her, but is too late: she drinks, and Laertes realizes the plot will be revealed. Laertes slashes Hamlet with his poisoned blade. In the ensuing scuffle, they switch weapons and Hamlet wounds Laertes with his own poisoned sword. Gertrude collapses and, claiming she has been poisoned, dies. In his dying moments, Laertes reconciles with Hamlet and reveals Claudius's plan. Hamlet rushes at Claudius and kills him. As the poison takes effect, Hamlet, hearing that Fortinbras is marching through the area, names the Norwegian prince as his successor. Horatio, distraught at the thought of being the last survivor, says he will commit suicide by drinking the dregs of Gertrude's poisoned wine, but Hamlet begs him to live on and tell his story. Hamlet dies, proclaiming "the rest is silence." Fortinbras, who was ostensibly marching towards Poland with his army, arrives at the palace, along with an English ambassador bringing news of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern's deaths. Horatio promises to recount the full story of what happened, and Fortinbras, seeing the entire Danish royal family dead, takes the crown for himself. Sources [ edit ] Main article: Sources of Hamlet A facsimile of Gesta Danorum by Saxo Grammaticus , which contains the legend of Amleth Hamlet -like legends are so widely found (for example in Italy, Spain, Scandinavia, Byzantium, and Arabia) that the core "hero-as-fool" theme is possibly Indo-European in origin. [ 8 ] Several ancient written precursors to Hamlet can be identified. The first is the anonymous Scandinavian Saga of Hrolf Kraki . In this, the murdered king has two sons— Hroar and Helgi —who spend most of the story in disguise, under false names, rather than feigning madness, in a sequence of events that differs from Shakespeare's. [ 9 ] The second is the Roman legend of Brutus , recorded in two separate Latin works. Its hero, Lucius ("shining, light"), changes his name and persona to Brutus ("dull, stupid"), playing the role of a fool to avoid the fate of his father and brothers, and eventually slaying his family's killer, King Tarquinius. A 17th-century Nordic scholar, Torfaeus, compared the Icelandic hero Amlodi and the Spanish hero Prince Ambales (from the Ambales Saga ) to Shakespeare's Hamlet . Similarities include the prince's feigned madness, his accidental killing of the king's counsellor in his mother's bedroom, and the eventual slaying of his uncle. [ 10 ] Many of the earlier legendary elements are interwoven in the 13th-century Vita Amlethi ("The Life of Amleth") [ 11 ] by Saxo Grammaticus , part of Gesta Danorum . [ 12 ] Written in Latin, it reflects classical Roman concepts of virtue and heroism, and was widely available in Shakespeare's day. [ 13 ] Significant parallels include the prince feigning madness, his mother's hasty marriage to the usurper, the prince killing a hidden spy, and the prince substituting the execution of two retainers for his own. A reasonably faithful version of Saxo's story was translated into French in 1570 by François de Belleforest , in his Histoires tragiques . [ 14 ] Belleforest embellished Saxo's text substantially, almost doubling its length, and introduced the hero's melancholy . [ 15 ] Title page of The Spanish Tragedy , by Thomas Kyd. According to one theory, Shakespeare's main source is an earlier play—now lost—known today as the Ur-Hamlet . Possibly written by Thomas Kyd or even William Shakespeare, the Ur-Hamlet would have existed by 1589, and would have incorporated a ghost. [ 16 ] Shakespeare's company, the Chamberlain's Men , may have purchased that play and performed a version for some time, which Shakespeare reworked. [ 17 ] Since no copy of the Ur-Hamlet has survived, however, it is impossible to compare its language and style with the known works of any of its putative authors. Consequently, there is no direct evidence that Kyd wrote it, nor any evidence that the play was not an early version of Hamlet by Shakespeare himself. This latter idea—placing Hamlet far earlier than the generally accepted date, with a much longer period of development—has attracted some support. [ 18 ] The upshot is that scholars cannot assert with any confidence how much material Shakespeare took from the Ur-Hamlet (if it even existed), how much from Belleforest or Saxo, and how much from other contemporary sources (such as Kyd's The Spanish Tragedy ). No clear evidence exists that Shakespeare made any direct references to Saxo's version. However, elements of Belleforest's version which are not in Saxo's story do appear in Shakespeare's play. Whether Shakespeare took these from Belleforest directly or through the Ur-Hamlet remains unclear. [ 19 ] Most scholars reject the idea that Hamlet is in any way connected with Shakespeare's only son, Hamnet Shakespeare , who died in 1596 at age eleven. Conventional wisdom holds that Hamlet is too obviously connected to legend, and the name Hamnet was quite popular at the time. [ 20 ] However, Stephen Greenblatt has argued that the coincidence of the names and Shakespeare's grief for the loss of his son may lie at the heart of the tragedy. He notes that the name of Hamnet Sadler, the Stratford neighbour after whom Hamnet was named, was often written as Hamlet Sadler and that, in the loose orthography of the time, the names were virtually interchangeable. [ 21 ] Sadler's first name is spelled "Hamlett" in Shakespeare's will. [ 22 ] Scholars have often speculated that Hamlet ' s Polonius might have been inspired by William Cecil (Lord Burghley)—Lord High Treasurer and chief counsellor to Queen Elizabeth I . E. K. Chambers suggested Polonius's advice to Laertes may have echoed Burghley's to his son Robert Cecil . John Dover Wilson thought it almost certain that the figure of Polonius caricatured Burghley. A. L. Rowse speculated that Polonius's tedious verbosity might have resembled Burghley's. [ 23 ] Lilian Winstanley thought the name Corambis (in the First Quarto) did suggest Cecil and Burghley. [ 24 ] Harold Jenkins considers the idea that Polonius might be a caricature of Burghley is a conjecture, and may be based on the similar role they each played at court, and also on the fact that Burghley addressed his Ten Precepts to his son, as in the play Polonius offers “precepts” to Laertes, his son. [ 25 ] Jenkins suggests that any personal satire may be found in the name “Polonius”, which might point to a Polish or Polonian connection. [ 26 ] G. R. Hibbard hypothesised that differences in names (Corambis/Polonius:Montano/Raynoldo) between the First Quarto and other editions might reflect a desire not to offend scholars at Oxford University. [ 27 ] Date [ edit ] John Barrymore as Hamlet (1922) "Any dating of Hamlet must be tentative", cautions the New Cambridge editor, Phillip Edwards. [ 28 ] The earliest date estimate relies on Hamlet ' s frequent allusions to Shakespeare's Julius Caesar , itself dated to mid-1599. [ 29 ] The latest date estimate is based on an entry, of 26 July 1602, in the Register of the Stationers' Company , indicating that Hamlet was "latelie Acted by the Lo: Chamberleyne his servantes ". In 1598, Francis Meres published his Palladis Tamia , a survey of English literature from Chaucer to its present day, within which twelve of Shakespeare's plays are named. Hamlet is not among them, suggesting that it had not yet been written. As Hamlet was very popular, Bernard Lott, the series editor of New Swan , believes it "unlikely that he [Meres] would have overlooked ... so significant a piece". [ 30 ] The phrase "little eyases" [ 31 ] in the First Folio (F1) may allude to the Children of the Chapel , whose popularity in London forced the Globe company into provincial touring. This became known as the War of the Theatres , and supports a 1601 dating. [ 30 ] Katherine Duncan-Jones accepts a 1600–1 attribution for the date Hamlet was written, but notes that the Lord Chamberlain's Men , playing Hamlet in the 3000-capacity Globe , were unlikely to be put to any disadvantage by an audience of "barely one hundred" for the Children of the Chapel's equivalent play, Antonio's Revenge ; she believes that Shakespeare, confident in the superiority of his own work, was making a playful and charitable allusion to his friend John Marston's very similar piece. [ 32 ] A contemporary of Shakespeare's, Gabriel Harvey , wrote a marginal note in his copy of the 1598 edition of Chaucer's works, which some scholars use as dating evidence. Harvey's note says that "the wiser sort" enjoy Hamlet , and implies that the Earl of Essex —executed in February 1601 for rebellion—was still alive. Other scholars consider this inconclusive. Edwards, for example, concludes that the "sense of time is so confused in Harvey's note that it is really of little use in trying to date Hamlet ". This is because the same note also refers to Spenser and Watson as if they were still alive ("our flourishing metricians "), but also mentions " Owen's new epigrams", published in 1607. [ 33 ] Texts [ edit ] Title page of the 1605 printing (Q2) of Hamlet Three early editions of the text have survived, making attempts to establish a single "authentic" text problematic. [ 34 ] Each is different from the others: [ 35 ] First Quarto ( Q1 ): In 1603 the booksellers Nicholas Ling and John Trundell published, and Valentine Simmes printed, the so-called " bad " first quarto. Q1 contains just over half of the text of the later second quarto. Second Quarto ( Q2 ): In 1604 Nicholas Ling published, and James Roberts printed, the second quarto. Some copies are dated 1605, which may indicate a second impression; consequently, Q2 is often dated "1604/5". Q2 is the longest early edition, although it omits about 77 lines found in F1 [ 36 ] (most likely to avoid offending James I's queen, Anne of Denmark ). [ 37 ] First Folio ( F1 ): In 1623 Edward Blount and William and Isaac Jaggard published the First Folio, the first edition of Shakespeare's Complete Works . [ 38 ] Other folios and quartos were subsequently published—including John Smethwick 's Q3, Q4, and Q5 (1611–37)—but these are regarded as derivatives of the first three editions. [ 38 ] The first page of the First Folio printing of Hamlet , 1623 Early editors of Shakespeare's works , beginning with Nicholas Rowe (1709) and Lewis Theobald (1733), combined material from the two earliest sources of Hamlet available at the time, Q2 and F1. Each text contains material that the other lacks, with many minor differences in wording: scarcely 200 lines are identical in the two. Editors have combined them in an effort to create one "inclusive" text that reflects an imagined "ideal" of Shakespeare's original. Theobald's version became standard for a long time, [ 39 ] and his "full text" approach continues to influence editorial practice to the present day. Some contemporary scholarship, however, discounts this approach, instead considering "an authentic Hamlet an unrealisable ideal. ... there are texts of this play but no text ". [ 40 ] The 2006 publication by Arden Shakespeare of different Hamlet texts in different volumes is perhaps evidence of this shifting focus and emphasis. [ 41 ] Traditionally, editors of Shakespeare's plays have divided them into five acts . None of the early texts of Hamlet , however, were arranged this way, and the play's division into acts and scenes derives from a 1676 quarto. Modern editors generally follow this traditional division, but consider it unsatisfactory; for example, after Hamlet drags Polonius's body out of Gertrude's bedchamber, there is an act-break [ 42 ] after which the action appears to continue uninterrupted. [ 43 ] Comparison of the 'To be, or not to be' soliloquy in the first three editions of Hamlet, showing the varying quality of the text in the Bad Quarto , the Good Quarto and the First Folio The discovery in 1823 of Q1—whose existence had been quite unsuspected—caused considerable interest and excitement, raising many questions of editorial practice and interpretation. Scholars immediately identified apparent deficiencies in Q1, which was instrumental in the development of the concept of a Shakespearean " bad quarto ". [ 44 ] Yet Q1 has value: it contains stage directions that reveal actual stage practices in a way that Q2 and F1 do not; it contains an entire scene (usually labelled 4.6) [ 45 ] that does not appear in either Q2 or F1; and it is useful for comparison with the later editions. The scene order is more coherent, without the problems of Q2 and F1 of Hamlet seeming to resolve something in one scene and enter the next drowning in indecision. The major deficiency of Q1 is in the language: particularly noticeable in the opening lines of the famous " To be, or not to be " soliloquy: "To be, or not to be, aye there's the point. / To die, to sleep, is that all? Aye all: / No, to sleep, to dream, aye marry there it goes." Q1 is considerably shorter than Q2 or F1 and may be a memorial reconstruction of the play as Shakespeare's company performed it, by an actor who played a minor role (most likely Marcellus). [ 46 ] Scholars disagree whether the reconstruction was pirated or authorised. Another theory, considered by New Cambridge editor Kathleen Irace, holds that Q1 is an abridged version intended especially for travelling productions. [ 47 ] The idea that Q1 is not riddled with error but is instead eminently fit for the stage has led to at least 28 different Q1 productions since 1881. [ 48 ] Analysis and criticism [ edit ] Main article: Critical approaches to Hamlet Critical history [ edit ] From the early 17th century, the play was famous for its ghost and vivid dramatisation of melancholy and insanity , leading to a procession of mad courtiers and ladies in Jacobean and Caroline drama. [ 49 ] Though it remained popular with mass audiences, late 17th-century Restoration critics saw Hamlet as primitive and disapproved of its lack of unity and decorum . [ 50 ] This view changed drastically in the 18th century, when critics regarded Hamlet as a hero—a pure, brilliant young man thrust into unfortunate circumstances. [ 51 ] By the mid-18th century, however, the advent of Gothic literature brought psychological and mystical readings, returning madness and the Ghost to the forefront. [ 52 ] Not until the late 18th century did critics and performers begin to view Hamlet as confusing and inconsistent. Before then, he was either mad, or not; either a hero, or not; with no in-betweens. [ 53 ] These developments represented a fundamental change in literary criticism, which came to focus more on character and less on plot. [ 54 ] By the 19th century, Romantic critics valued Hamlet for its internal, individual conflict reflecting the strong contemporary emphasis on internal struggles and inner character in general. [ 55 ] Then too, critics started to focus on Hamlet's delay as a character trait, rather than a plot device. [ 54 ] This focus on character and internal struggle continued into the 20th century, when criticism branched in several directions, discussed in context and interpretation below. Dramatic structure [ edit ] Hamlet departed from contemporary dramatic convention in several ways. For example, in Shakespeare's day, plays were usually expected to follow the advice of Aristotle in his Poetics : that a drama should focus on action, not character. In Hamlet , Shakespeare reverses this so that it is through the soliloquies , not the action, that the audience learns Hamlet's motives and thoughts. The play is full of seeming discontinuities and irregularities of action, except in the "bad" quarto. At one point, as in the Gravedigger scene, [ 7 ] Hamlet seems resolved to kill Claudius: in the next scene, however, when Claudius appears, he is suddenly tame. Scholars still debate whether these twists are mistakes or intentional additions to add to the play's themes of confusion and duality. [ 56 ] Finally, in a period when most plays ran for two hours or so, the full text of Hamlet —Shakespeare's longest play, with 4,042 lines, totalling 29,551 words—often takes over four hours to deliver. [ 57 ] Even today the play is rarely performed in its entirety, and has only once been dramatised on film completely, in Kenneth Branagh 's 1996 version. Hamlet also contains a favourite Shakespearean device, a play within the play , a literary device or conceit in which one story is told during the action of another story. [ 58 ] Language [ edit ] Hamlet's statement that his dark clothes are the outer sign of his inner grief demonstrates strong rhetorical skill. (Artist: Eugène Delacroix 1834). Compared with language in a modern newspaper, magazine or popular novel, Shakespeare's language can strike contemporary readers as complex, elaborate and at times difficult to understand. Remarkably, it still works well enough in the theatre: audiences at the reconstruction of 'Shakespeare's Globe' in London, many of whom have never been to the theatre before, let alone to a play by Shakespeare, seem to have little difficulty grasping the play's action. [ 59 ] Much of Hamlet' s language is courtly: elaborate, witty discourse, as recommended by Baldassare Castiglione 's 1528 etiquette guide, The Courtier . This work specifically advises royal retainers to amuse their masters with inventive language. Osric and Polonius, especially, seem to respect this injunction. Claudius's speech is rich with rhetorical figures—as is Hamlet's and, at times, Ophelia's—while the language of Horatio, the guards, and the gravediggers is simpler. Claudius's high status is reinforced by using the royal first person plural ("we" or "us"), and anaphora mixed with metaphor to resonate with Greek political speeches. [ 60 ] Hamlet is the most skilled of all at rhetoric. He uses highly developed metaphors, stichomythia , and in nine memorable words deploys both anaphora and asyndeton : "to die: to sleep— / To sleep, perchance to dream". [ 61 ] In contrast, when occasion demands, he is precise and straightforward, as when he explains his inward emotion to his mother: "But I have that within which passes show, / These but the trappings and the suits of woe". [ 62 ] At times, he relies heavily on puns to express his true thoughts while simultaneously concealing them. [ 63 ] His "nunnery" remarks [ 64 ] to Ophelia are an example of a cruel double meaning as nunnery was Elizabethan slang for brothel . [ 65 ] [ 66 ] His very first words in the play are a pun; when Claudius addresses him as "my cousin Hamlet, and my son", Hamlet says as an aside: "A little more than kin, and less than kind." [ 67 ] An aside is a dramatic device in which a character speaks to the audience. By convention the audience realises that the character's speech is unheard by the other characters on stage. It may be addressed to the audience expressly (in character or out) or represent an unspoken thought. An unusual rhetorical device, hendiadys , appears in several places in the play. Examples are found in Ophelia's speech at the end of the nunnery scene: "Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state"; "And I, of ladies most deject and wretched ". [ 68 ] Many scholars have found it odd that Shakespeare would, seemingly arbitrarily, use this rhetorical form throughout the play. One explanation may be that Hamlet was written later in Shakespeare's life, when he was adept at matching rhetorical devices to characters and the plot. Linguist George T. Wright suggests that hendiadys had been used deliberately to heighten the play's sense of duality and dislocation. [ 69 ] Pauline Kiernan argues that Shakespeare changed English drama forever in Hamlet because he "showed how a character's language can often be saying several things at once, and contradictory meanings at that, to reflect fragmented thoughts and disturbed feelings." She gives the example of Hamlet's advice to Ophelia, "get thee to a nunnery", which is simultaneously a reference to a place of chastity and a slang term for a brothel, reflecting Hamlet's confused feelings about female sexuality. [ 70 ] Context and interpretation [ edit ] Religious [ edit ] Ophelia depicts Lady Ophelia's mysterious death by drowning. In the play, it is discussed by the gravediggers whether Ophelia's death was a suicide and whether or not she merits a Christian burial. (Artist: John Everett Millais 1852). Written at a time of religious upheaval, and in the wake of the English Reformation , the play is alternately Catholic (or piously medieval) and Protestant (or consciously modern). The Ghost describes himself as being in purgatory , and as dying without last rites . This and Ophelia's burial ceremony, which is characteristically Catholic, make up most of the play's Catholic connections. Some scholars have observed that revenge tragedies come from traditionally Catholic countries, such as Spain and Italy; and they present a contradiction, since according to Catholic doctrine the strongest duty is to God and family. Hamlet's conundrum, then, is whether to avenge his father and kill Claudius, or to leave the vengeance to God, as his religion requires. [ 71 ] Much of the play's Protestantism derives from its location in Denmark—both then and now a predominantly Protestant country, though it is unclear whether the fictional Denmark of the play is intended to mirror this fact. The play does mention Wittenberg , where Hamlet, Horatio, and Rosencrantz and Guildenstern attend university, and where Martin Luther first proposed his 95 theses in 1517, effectively ushering in the Protestant Reformation . [ 72 ] In Shakespeare's day Denmark, like the majority of Scandinavia, was Lutheran. [ 73 ] Philosophical [ edit ] Philosophical ideas in Hamlet are similar to those of the French writer Michel de Montaigne , a contemporary of Shakespeare's. (Artist: Thomas de Leu , fl. 1560–1612). Hamlet is often perceived as a philosophical character, expounding ideas that are now described as relativist , existentialist , and sceptical . For example, he expresses a subjectivistic idea when he says to Rosencrantz: "there is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so". [ 74 ] The idea that nothing is real except in the mind of the individual finds its roots in the Greek Sophists , who argued that since nothing can be perceived except through the senses—and since all individuals sense, and therefore perceive things differently—there is no absolute truth, only relative truth. [ 75 ] The clearest alleged instance of existentialism is in the " to be, or not to be " [ 76 ] speech, where Hamlet is thought by some to use "being" to allude to life and action, and "not being" to death and inaction. Hamlet reflects the contemporary scepticism promoted by the French Renaissance humanist , Montaigne. [ 77 ] Prior to Montaigne's time, humanists such as Pico della Mirandola had argued that man was God's greatest creation, made in God's image and able to choose his own nature, but this view was subsequently challenged in Michel de Montaigne 's Essais of 1580. Hamlet's " What a piece of work is a man " could supposedly echo many of Montaigne's ideas, and many scholars have disagreed whether Shakespeare drew directly from Montaigne or whether both men were simply reacting similarly to the spirit of the times. [ 78 ] Nevertheless, if the sentence is analysed in the textual context [ 79 ] it is easy to understand how Hamlet was being sarcastic: "Man delights not me", he concludes. Amaral [ 80 ] argues that this is the result of melancholy . This condition was a main subject of philosophy in this epoch. After a period of confidence in reason's ability to unveil reality (Renaissance), 'Mannerism' started questioning its power. Hamlet shows traces of this. In this sense, Hamlet is not feigning madness, but he is indeed trapped between the world everybody expects him to see (the lies told by Claudius and accepted by all, i.e. social decorum) and the world revealed to him by knowledge (the reality of the murdering, as testified by his father's ghost). This condition of being trapped between two different ways of seeing reality was also pictured by Shakespeare's contemporary Cervantes, in Don Quixote . This profound meditation was examined by the philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer in The World as Will and Representation . Schopenhauer uses Hamlet to clarify his main argument. He argues that the world as we see it is a conjunction of representations. These representations are formed by the projection of our will towards the world. We can only see objects of our desires. In this sense he argues that only art could show us that reality is such a construct. Exactly as Hamlet did: "If the whole world as representation is only the visibility of the will, then art is the elucidation of this visibility, the camera obscura which shows the objects more purely, and enables us to survey and comprehend them better. It is the play within the play, the stage on the stage in Hamlet ." [ 81 ] In his openness to embrace the ghost's message, Hamlet assuages Horatio's wonderment with the analytical assertion, "There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy." Psychoanalytic [ edit ] Freud suggested that an unconscious oedipal conflict caused Hamlet's hesitations. (Artist: Eugène Delacroix 1844). In the first half of the 20th century, when psychoanalysis was at the height of its influence, its concepts were applied to Hamlet , notably by Sigmund Freud , Ernest Jones , and Jacques Lacan , and these studies influenced theatrical productions. In his The Interpretation of Dreams (1900), Freud's analysis starts from the premise that "the play is built up on Hamlet's hesitations over fulfilling the task of revenge that is assigned to him; but its text offers no reasons or motives for these hesitations". [ 82 ] After reviewing various literary theories, Freud concludes that Hamlet has an " Oedipal desire for his mother and the subsequent guilt [is] preventing him from murdering the man [Claudius] who has done what he unconsciously wanted to do". [ 83 ] Confronted with his repressed desires , Hamlet realises that "he himself is literally no better than the sinner whom he is to punish". [ 82 ] Freud suggests that Hamlet's apparent "distaste for sexuality"—articulated in his "nunnery" conversation with Ophelia—accords with this interpretation. [ 84 ] [ 85 ] This "distaste for sexuality" has sparked theories of Hamlet being what is now referred to as a homosexual or asexual . [ 86 ] John Barrymore 's long-running 1922 performance in New York, directed by Thomas Hopkins, "broke new ground in its Freudian approach to character", in keeping with the post-World War I rebellion against everything Victorian. [ 87 ] He had a "blunter intention" than presenting the genteel, sweet prince of 19th-century tradition, imbuing his character with virility and lust. [ 88 ] Beginning in 1910, with the publication of "The Oedipus-Complex as An Explanation of Hamlet's Mystery: Study in Motive," [ 89 ] Ernest Jones —a psychoanalyst and Freud's biographer—developed Freud's ideas into a series of essays that culminated in his book Hamlet and Oedipus (1949). Influenced by Jones's psychoanalytic approach, several productions have portrayed the "closet scene", [ 90 ] where Hamlet confronts his mother in her private quarters, in a sexual light. In this reading, Hamlet is disgusted by his mother's "incestuous" relationship with Claudius while simultaneously fearful of killing him, as this would clear Hamlet's path to his mother's bed. Ophelia's madness after her father's death may also be read through the Freudian lens: as a reaction to the death of her hoped-for lover, her father. She is overwhelmed by having her unfulfilled love for him so abruptly terminated and drifts into the oblivion of insanity. [ 91 ] In 1937, Tyrone Guthrie directed Laurence Olivier in a Jones-inspired Hamlet at The Old Vic . [ 92 ] Olivier later used some of these same ideas in his 1948 film version of the play. In the 1950s, Lacan's structuralist theories about Hamlet were first presented in a series of seminars given in Paris and later published in "Desire and the Interpretation of Desire in Hamlet ". Lacan postulated that the human psyche is determined by structures of language and that the linguistic structures of Hamlet shed light on human desire. [ 83 ] His point of departure is Freud's Oedipal theories, and the central theme of mourning that runs through Hamlet . [ 83 ] In Lacan's analysis, Hamlet unconsciously assumes the role of phallus —the cause of his inaction—and is increasingly distanced from reality "by mourning, fantasy , narcissism and psychosis ", which create holes (or lack ) in the real, imaginary, and symbolic aspects of his psyche. [ 83 ] Lacan's theories influenced literary criticism of Hamlet because of his alternative vision of the play and his use of semantics to explore the play's psychological landscape. [ 83 ] In the Bloom's Shakespeare Through the Ages volume on Hamlet, editors Bloom and Foster express a conviction that the intentions of Shakespeare in portraying the character of Hamlet in the play exceeded the capacity of the Freudian Oedipus complex to completely encompass the extent of characteristics depicted in Hamlet throughout the tragedy: "For once, Freud regressed in attempting to fasten the Oedipus Complex upon Hamlet: it will not stick, and merely showed that Freud did better than T.S. Eliot, who preferred Coriolanus to Hamlet , or so he said. Who can believe Eliot, when he exposes his own Hamlet Complex by declaring the play to be an aesthetic failure?" [ 93 ] The book also notes James Joyce's interpretation, stating that he "did far better in the Library Scene of Ulysses , where Stephen marvelously credits Shakespeare, in this play, with universal fatherhood while accurately implying that Hamlet is fatherless, thus opening a pragmatic gap between Shakespeare and Hamlet." [ 93 ] Joshua Rothman has written in The New Yorker that, "we tell the story wrong when we say that Freud used the idea of the Oedipus complex to understand Hamlet ." Rothman suggests that, "In fact, it was the other way around: Hamlet helped Freud understand, and perhaps even invent, psychoanalysis." He concludes, "The Oedipus complex is a misnomer. It should be called the 'Hamlet complex'." [ 94 ] In the essay "Hamlet Made Simple", David P. Gontar turns the tables on the psychoanalysts by suggesting that Claudius is not a symbolic father figure but actually Prince Hamlet's biological father. The hesitation in killing Claudius results from an unwillingness on Hamlet's part to slay his real father. If Hamlet is the biological son of Claudius, that explains many things. Hamlet doesn't become King of Denmark on the occasion of the King's death inasmuch as it is an open secret in court that he is Claudius's biological son, and as such he is merely a court bastard not in the line of succession. He is angry with his mother because of her long standing affair with a man Hamlet hates, and Hamlet must face the fact that he has been sired by the man he loathes. That point overturns T. S. Eliot's complaint that the play is a failure for not furnishing an "objective correlative" to account for Hamlet's rage at his mother. Gontar suggests that if the reader assumes that Hamlet is not who he seems to be, the objective correlative becomes apparent. Hamlet is suicidal in the first soliloquy not because his mother quickly remarries but because of her adulterous affair with the despised Claudius which makes Hamlet his son. Finally, the Ghost's confirmation of an alternative fatherhood for Hamlet is a fabrication that gives the Prince a motive for revenge. [ 95 ] Feminist [ edit ] Ophelia is distracted by grief. [ 96 ] Feminist critics have explored her descent into madness. (Artist: Henrietta Rae 1890). In the 20th century, feminist critics opened up new approaches to Gertrude and Ophelia. New Historicist and cultural materialist critics examined the play in its historical context, attempting to piece together its original cultural environment. [ 97 ] They focused on the gender system of early modern England, pointing to the common trinity of maid, wife, or widow , with whores outside of that stereotype. In this analysis, the essence of Hamlet is the central character's changed perception of his mother as a whore because of her failure to remain faithful to Old Hamlet. In consequence, Hamlet loses his faith in all women, treating Ophelia as if she too were a whore and dishonest with Hamlet. Ophelia, by some critics, can be seen as honest and fair; however, it is virtually impossible to link these two traits, since 'fairness' is an outward trait, while 'honesty' is an inward trait. [ 98 ] Hamlet tries to show his mother Gertrude his father's ghost (artist: Nicolai A. Abildgaard ca. 1778). Carolyn Heilbrun 's 1957 essay "The Character of Hamlet's Mother" defends Gertrude, arguing that the text never hints that Gertrude knew of Claudius poisoning King Hamlet. This analysis has been praised by many feminist critics, combating what is, by Heilbrun's argument, centuries' worth of misinterpretation. By this account, Gertrude's worst crime is of pragmatically marrying her brother-in-law in order to avoid a power vacuum. This is borne out by the fact that King Hamlet's ghost tells Hamlet to leave Gertrude out of Hamlet's revenge, to leave her to heaven, an arbitrary mercy to grant to a conspirator to murder. [ 99 ] [ 100 ] This view has not been without objection from some critics. [ 101 ] Ophelia has also been defended by feminist critics, most notably Elaine Showalter . [ 102 ] Ophelia is surrounded by powerful men: her father, brother, and Hamlet. All three disappear: Laertes leaves, Hamlet abandons her, and Polonius dies. Conventional theories had argued that without these three powerful men making decisions for her, Ophelia is driven into madness. [ 103 ] Feminist theorists argue that she goes mad with guilt because, when Hamlet kills her father, he has fulfilled her sexual desire to have Hamlet kill her father so they can be together. Showalter points out that Ophelia has become the symbol of the distraught and hysterical woman in modern culture. [ 104 ] Influence [ edit ] See also Literary influence of Hamlet Hamlet is one of the most quoted works in the English language, and is often included on lists of the world's greatest literature. [ 105 ] As such, it reverberates through the writing of later centuries. Academic Laurie Osborne identifies the direct influence of Hamlet in numerous modern narratives, and divides them into four main categories: fictional accounts of the play's composition, simplifications of the story for young readers, stories expanding the role of one or more characters, and narratives featuring performances of the play. [ 106 ] Actors before Hamlet by Władysław Czachórski (1875), National Museum in Warsaw . Henry Fielding 's Tom Jones , published about 1749, describes a visit to Hamlet by Tom Jones and Mr Partridge, with similarities to the "play within a play". [ 107 ] In contrast, Goethe's Bildungsroman Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship , written between 1776 and 1796, not only has a production of Hamlet at its core but also creates parallels between the Ghost and Wilhelm Meister's dead father. [ 107 ] In the early 1850s, in Pierre , Herman Melville focuses on a Hamlet-like character's long development as a writer. [ 107 ] Ten years later, Dickens's Great Expectations contains many Hamlet-like plot elements: it is driven by revenge-motivated actions, contains ghost-like characters (Abel Magwitch and Miss Havisham ), and focuses on the hero's guilt. [ 107 ] Academic Alexander Welsh notes that Great Expectations is an "autobiographical novel" and "anticipates psychoanalytic readings of Hamlet itself". [ 108 ] About the same time, George Eliot 's The Mill on the Floss was published, introducing Maggie Tulliver "who is explicitly compared with Hamlet" [ 109 ] though "with a reputation for sanity". [ 110 ] L. Frank Baum 's first published short story was "They Played a New Hamlet" (1895). When Baum had been touring New York State in the title role, the actor playing the ghost fell through the floorboards, and the rural audience thought it was part of the show and demanded that the actor repeat the fall, because they thought it was funny. Baum would later recount the actual story in an article, but the short story is told from the point of view of the actor playing the Ghost. In the 1920s, James Joyce managed "a more upbeat version" of Hamlet —stripped of obsession and revenge—in Ulysses , though its main parallels are with Homer 's Odyssey . [ 107 ] In the 1990s, two novelists were explicitly influenced by Hamlet . In Angela Carter 's Wise Children , To be or not to be [ 111 ] is reworked as a song and dance routine, and Iris Murdoch 's The Black Prince has Oedipal themes and murder intertwined with a love affair between a Hamlet -obsessed writer, Bradley Pearson, and the daughter of his rival. [ 109 ] There is the story of the woman who read Hamlet for the first time and said, "I don't see why people admire that play so. It is nothing but a bunch of quotations strung together." — Isaac Asimov , Asimov's Guide to Shakespeare , pg vii, Avenal Books, 1970 Performance history [ edit ] The day we see Hamlet die in the theatre, something of him dies for us. He is dethroned by the spectre of an actor, and we shall never be able to keep the usurper out of our dreams. Maurice Maeterlinck (1890). [ 112 ] Main articles: Hamlet in performance and Shakespeare in performance Shakespeare's day to the Interregnum [ edit ] Shakespeare almost certainly wrote the role of Hamlet for Richard Burbage . He was the chief tragedian of the Lord Chamberlain's Men , with a capacious memory for lines and a wide emotional range. [ 5 ] Judging by the number of reprints, Hamlet appears to have been Shakespeare's fourth most popular play during his lifetime—only Henry IV Part 1 , Richard III and Pericles eclipsed it. [ 2 ] Shakespeare provides no clear indication of when his play is set; however, as Elizabethan actors performed at the Globe in contemporary dress on minimal sets, this would not have affected the staging. [ 113 ] Firm evidence for specific early performances of the play is scant. What is known is that the crew of the ship Red Dragon , anchored off Sierra Leone , performed Hamlet in September 1607; [ 114 ] that the play toured in Germany within five years of Shakespeare's death; [ 115 ] and that it was performed before James I in 1619 and Charles I in 1637. [ 116 ] Oxford editor George Hibbard argues that, since the contemporary literature contains many allusions and references to Hamlet (only Falstaff is mentioned more, from Shakespeare), the play was surely performed with a frequency that the historical record misses. [ 117 ] All theatres were closed down by the Puritan government during the Interregnum . [ 118 ] Even during this time, however, playlets known as drolls were often performed illegally, including one called The Grave-Makers based on Act 5, Scene 1 of Hamlet . [ 119 ] Restoration and 18th century [ edit ] Title page and frontispiece for Hamlet, Prince of Denmark: A Tragedy. As it is now acted at the Theatres-Royal in Drury-Lane and Covent-Garden. London, 1776 The play was revived early in the Restoration . When the existing stock of pre- civil war plays was divided between the two newly created patent theatre companies , Hamlet was the only Shakespearean favourite that Sir William Davenant's Duke's Company secured. [ 120 ] It became the first of Shakespeare's plays to be presented with movable flats painted with generic scenery behind the proscenium arch of Lincoln's Inn Fields Theatre . [ 121 ] This new stage convention highlighted the frequency with which Shakespeare shifts dramatic location, encouraging the recurrent criticisms of his violation of the neoclassical principle of maintaining a unity of place . [ 122 ] Davenant cast Thomas Betterton in the eponymous role, and he continued to play the Dane until he was 74. [ 123 ] David Garrick at Drury Lane produced a version that adapted Shakespeare heavily; he declared: "I had sworn I would not leave the stage till I had rescued that noble play from all the rubbish of the fifth act. I have brought it forth without the grave-digger's trick, Osrick, & the fencing match". [ 124 ] The first actor known to have played Hamlet in North America is Lewis Hallam. Jr., in the American Company 's production in Philadelphia in 1759. [ 125 ] David Garrick 's iconic hand gesture expresses Hamlet's shock at the first sight of the Ghost. (Artist: unknown). John Philip Kemble made his Drury Lane debut as Hamlet in 1783. [ 126 ] His performance was said to be 20 minutes longer than anyone else's, and his lengthy pauses provoked the suggestion that "music should be played between the words". [ 127 ] Sarah Siddons was the first actress known to play Hamlet; many women have since played him as a breeches role , to great acclaim. [ 128 ] In 1748, Alexander Sumarokov wrote a Russian adaptation that focused on Prince Hamlet as the embodiment of an opposition to Claudius's tyranny—a treatment that would recur in Eastern European versions into the 20th century. [ 129 ] In the years following America's independence, Thomas Apthorpe Cooper , the young nation's leading tragedian, performed Hamlet among other plays at the Chestnut Street Theatre in Philadelphia, and at the Park Theatre in New York. Although chided for "acknowledging acquaintances in the audience" and "inadequate memorisation of his lines", he became a national celebrity. [ 130 ] 19th century [ edit ] A poster, ca. 1884, for an American production of Hamlet (starring Thomas W. Keene), showing several of the key scenes From around 1810 to 1840, the best-known Shakespearean performances in the United States were tours by leading London actors—including George Frederick Cooke , Junius Brutus Booth , Edmund Kean , William Charles Macready , and Charles Kemble . Of these, Booth remained to make his career in the States, fathering the nation's most notorious actor, John Wilkes Booth (who later assassinated Abraham Lincoln ), and its most famous Hamlet, Edwin Booth . [ 131 ] Edwin Booth's Hamlet was described as "like the dark, mad, dreamy, mysterious hero of a poem ... [acted] in an ideal manner, as far removed as possible from the plane of actual life". [ 132 ] Booth played Hamlet for 100 nights in the 1864/5 season at The Winter Garden Theatre , inaugurating the era of long-run Shakespeare in America. [ 133 ] In the United Kingdom, the actor-managers of the Victorian era (including Kean, Samuel Phelps , Macready, and Henry Irving ) staged Shakespeare in a grand manner, with elaborate scenery and costumes. [ 134 ] The tendency of actor-managers to emphasise the importance of their own central character did not always meet with the critics' approval. George Bernard Shaw 's praise for Johnston Forbes-Robertson 's performance contains a sideswipe at Irving: "The story of the play was perfectly intelligible, and quite took the attention of the audience off the principal actor at moments. What is the Lyceum coming to?" [ 135 ] In London, Edmund Kean was the first Hamlet to abandon the regal finery usually associated with the role in favour of a plain costume, and he is said to have surprised his audience by playing Hamlet as serious and introspective. [ 136 ] In stark contrast to earlier opulence, William Poel 's 1881 production of the Q1 text was an early attempt at reconstructing the Elizabethan theatre's austerity; his only backdrop was a set of red curtains. [ 137 ] Sarah Bernhardt played the prince in her popular 1899 London production. In contrast to the "effeminate" view of the central character that usually accompanied a female casting, she described her character as "manly and resolute, but nonetheless thoughtful ... [he] thinks before he acts, a trait indicative of great strength and great spiritual power". [ 138 ] In France, Charles Kemble initiated an enthusiasm for Shakespeare; and leading members of the Romantic movement such as Victor Hugo and Alexandre Dumas saw his 1827 Paris performance of Hamlet , particularly admiring the madness of Harriet Smithson 's Ophelia. [ 139 ] In Germany, Hamlet had become so assimilated by the mid-19th century that Ferdinand Freiligrath declared that "Germany is Hamlet". [ 140 ] From the 1850s, the Parsi theatre tradition in India transformed Hamlet into folk performances, with dozens of songs added. [ 141 ] 20th century [ edit ] In 1908, Edward Gordon Craig designed the MAT production of Hamlet (1911–12). The isolated figure of Hamlet reclines in the dark foreground, while behind a gauze the rest of the court are absorbed in a bright, unified golden pyramid emanating from Claudius. Craig's famous screens are flat against the back in this scene. Apart from some western troupes' 19th-century visits, the first professional performance of Hamlet in Japan was Otojirō Kawakami 's 1903 Shimpa ("new school theatre") adaptation. [ 142 ] Shoyo Tsubouchi translated Hamlet and produced a performance in 1911 that blended Shingeki ("new drama") and Kabuki styles. [ 142 ] This hybrid-genre reached its peak in Fukuda Tsuneari 's 1955 Hamlet . [ 142 ] In 1998, Yukio Ninagawa produced an acclaimed version of Hamlet in the style of Nō theatre, which he took to London. [ 143 ] Constantin Stanislavski and Edward Gordon Craig —two of the 20th century's most influential theatre practitioners —collaborated on the Moscow Art Theatre 's seminal production of 1911–12 . [ 144 ] While Craig favoured stylised abstraction, Stanislavski, armed with his 'system,' explored psychological motivation. [ 145 ] Craig conceived of the play as a symbolist monodrama , offering a dream-like vision as seen through Hamlet's eyes alone. [ 146 ] This was most evident in the staging of the first court scene. [ 147 ] The most famous aspect of the production is Craig's use of large, abstract screens that altered the size and shape of the acting area for each scene, representing the character's state of mind spatially or visualising a dramaturgical progression. [ 148 ] The production attracted enthusiastic and unprecedented world-wide attention for the theatre and placed it "on the cultural map for Western Europe". [ 149 ] Hamlet is often played with contemporary political overtones. Leopold Jessner 's 1926 production at the Berlin Staatstheater portrayed Claudius's court as a parody of the corrupt and fawning court of Kaiser Wilhelm . [ 150 ] In Poland , the number of productions of Hamlet has tended to increase at times of political unrest, since its political themes (suspected crimes, coups, surveillance) can be used to comment on a contemporary situation. [ 151 ] Similarly, Czech directors have used the play at times of occupation: a 1941 Vinohrady Theatre production "emphasised, with due caution, the helpless situation of an intellectual attempting to endure in a ruthless environment". [ 152 ] In China, performances of Hamlet often have political significance: Gu Wuwei's 1916 The Usurper of State Power , an amalgam of Hamlet and Macbeth , was an attack on Yuan Shikai 's attempt to overthrow the republic. [ 153 ] In 1942, Jiao Juyin directed the play in a Confucian temple in Sichuan Province , to which the government had retreated from the advancing Japanese. [ 153 ] In the immediate aftermath of the collapse of the protests at Tiananmen Square , Lin Zhaohua staged a 1990 Hamlet in which the prince was an ordinary individual tortured by a loss of meaning. In this production, the actors playing Hamlet, Claudius and Polonius exchanged roles at crucial moments in the performance, including the moment of Claudius's death, at which point the actor mainly associated with Hamlet fell to the ground. [ 153 ] Mignon Nevada as Ophelia, 1910 Notable stagings in London and New York include Barrymore's 1925 production at the Haymarket ; it influenced subsequent performances by John Gielgud and Laurence Olivier . [ 154 ] Gielgud played the central role many times: his 1936 New York production ran for 132 performances, leading to the accolade that he was "the finest interpreter of the role since Barrymore". [ 155 ] Although "posterity has treated Maurice Evans less kindly", throughout the 1930s and 1940s he was regarded by many as the leading interpreter of Shakespeare in the United States and in the 1938/9 season he presented Broadway's first uncut Hamlet , running four and a half hours. [ 156 ] Evans later performed a highly truncated version of the play that he played for South Pacific war zones during World War II which made the prince a more decisive character. The staging, known as the "G.I. Hamlet," was produced on Broadway for 131 performances in 1945/46. [ 157 ] Olivier's 1937 performance at The Old Vic was popular with audiences but not with critics, with James Agate writing in a famous review in The Sunday Times , "Mr. Olivier does not speak poetry badly. He does not speak it at all.". [ 158 ] In 1937 Tyrone Guthrie directed the play at Elsinore, Denmark with Laurence Olivier as Hamlet and Vivien Leigh as Ophelia. In 1963, Olivier directed Peter O'Toole as Hamlet in the inaugural performance of the newly formed National Theatre ; critics found resonance between O'Toole's Hamlet and John Osborne 's hero, Jimmy Porter, from Look Back in Anger . [ 159 ] Richard Burton received his third Tony Award nomination when he played his second Hamlet, his first under John Gielgud's direction, in 1964 in a production that holds the record for the longest run of the play in Broadway history (137 performances). The performance was set on a bare stage, conceived to appear like a dress rehearsal, with Burton in a black v-neck sweater, and Gielgud himself tape-recorded the voice for the Ghost (which appeared as a looming shadow). It was immortalised both on record and on a film that played in US theatres for a week in 1964 as well as being the subject of books written by cast members William Redfield and Richard L. Sterne. Other New York portrayals of Hamlet of note include that of Ralph Fiennes 's in 1995 (for which he won the Tony Award for Best Actor) – which ran, from first preview to closing night, a total of one hundred performances. About the Fiennes Hamlet Vincent Canby wrote in The New York Times that it was "...not one for literary sleuths and Shakespeare scholars. It respects the play, but it doesn't provide any new material for arcane debates on what it all means. Instead it's an intelligent, beautifully read..." [ 160 ] Stacy Keach played the role with an all-star cast at Joseph Papp 's Delacorte Theatre in the early 70s, with Colleen Dewhurst 's Gertrude, James Earl Jones 's King, Barnard Hughes 's Polonius, Sam Waterston 's Laertes and Raúl Juliá 's Osric. Sam Waterston later played the role himself at the Delacorte for the New York Shakespeare Festival , and the show transferred to the Vivian Beaumont Theatre in 1975 (Stephen Lang played Bernardo and other roles). Stephen Lang 's Hamlet for the Roundabout Theatre Company in 1992 received mixed reviews [ 161 ] [ page needed ] [ 162 ] and ran for sixty-one performances. David Warner played the role with the Royal Shakespeare Theatre in 1965. William Hurt (at Circle Rep Off-Broadway, memorably performing "To Be Or Not to Be" while lying on the floor), Jon Voight at Rutgers, and Christopher Walken (fiercely) at Stratford CT have all played the role, as has Diane Venora at the Public Theatre. Off Broadway , the Riverside Shakespeare Company mounted an uncut first folio Hamlet in 1978 at Columbia University , with a playing time of under three hours. [ 163 ] In fact, Hamlet is the most produced Shakespeare play in New York theatre history, with sixty-four recorded productions on Broadway, and an untold number Off Broadway . [ 164 ] Ian Charleson performed Hamlet from 9 October to 13 November 1989, in Richard Eyre 's production at the Olivier Theatre , replacing Daniel Day-Lewis , who had abandoned the production. Seriously ill from AIDS at the time, Charleson died eight weeks after his last performance. Fellow actor and friend, Sir Ian McKellen , said that Charleson played Hamlet so well it was as if he had rehearsed the role all his life; McKellen called it "the perfect Hamlet". [ 165 ] [ 166 ] The performance garnered other major accolades as well, some critics echoing McKellen in calling it the definitive Hamlet performance. [ 167 ] 21st century [ edit ] Benedict Cumberbatch began playing Hamlet at the Barbican Theatre starting in August 2015. Hamlet continues to be staged regularly, with actors such as Simon Russell Beale , Ben Whishaw , David Tennant , Angela Winkler , Samuel West , Christopher Eccleston , Maxine Peake , and Christian Camargo , performing the lead role. [ 168 ] [ 169 ] [ 170 ] [ 171 ] In May 2009, Hamlet opened with Jude Law in the title role at the Donmar Warehouse West End season at Wyndham's Theatre . The production officially opened on 3 June and ran through 22 August 2009. [ 172 ] [ 173 ] A further production of the play ran at Elsinore Castle in Denmark from 25–30 August 2009. [ 174 ] The Jude Law Hamlet then moved to Broadway, and ran for 12 weeks at the Broadhurst Theatre in New York. [ 175 ] [ 176 ] In 2013, American actor Paul Giamatti won critical acclaim for his performance on stage in the title role of Hamlet , performed in modern dress , at the Yale Repertory Theater , at Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut . [ 177 ] The Globe Theatre of London initiated a project in 2014 to perform Hamlet in every country in the world in the space of two years. Titled Globe to Globe Hamlet , it began its tour on 23 April 2014, the 450th anniversary of Shakespeare's birth. As of 23 February 2016, the project had performed in 170 different countries. [ 178 ] Benedict Cumberbatch began an exclusive 12-week run at the 1,156-seat Barbican Theatre on August 25, 2015. The play is produced by Sonia Friedman , and directed by Lyndsey Turner, with set design by Es Devlin . It has been called the "Most In-Demand Theatre Production of All Time", after selling out in seven hours when tickets went on sale to the public on August 11, 2014, more than a year before the play opened. [ 179 ] [ 180 ] [ 181 ] Film and TV performances [ edit ] Main article: Hamlet on screen The earliest screen success for Hamlet was Sarah Bernhardt 's five-minute film of the fencing scene, [ 182 ] which was produced in 1900. The film was an early attempt at combining sound and film , music and words were recorded on phonograph records, to be played along with the film. [ 183 ] Silent versions were released in 1907, 1908, 1910, 1913, 1917, and 1920. [ 183 ] In the 1920 version, Asta Nielsen played the role of Hamlet as a woman who spends her life disguised as a man. [ 183 ] Laurence Olivier 's 1948 moody black-and-white Hamlet won best picture and best actor Oscars , and is still, as of 2015 [update] , the only Shakespeare film to have done so. His interpretation stressed the Oedipal overtones of the play, and cast 28-year-old Eileen Herlie as Hamlet's mother, opposite himself, at 41, as Hamlet. [ 184 ] In 1953, actor Jack Manning performed the play in 15-minute segments over two weeks in the short-lived late night DuMont series Monodrama Theater . New York Times TV critic Jack Gould praised Manning's performance as Hamlet. [ 185 ] Shakespeare experts Sir John Gielgud and Kenneth Branagh consider the definitive rendition of the Bard's tragic tale [ 186 ] to be the 1964 Russian film Gamlet ( Russian : Гамлет ) based on a translation by Boris Pasternak and directed by Grigori Kozintsev , with a score by Dmitri Shostakovich . [ 187 ] Innokenty Smoktunovsky was cast in the role of Hamlet; he was particularly praised by Sir Laurence Olivier . John Gielgud directed Richard Burton in a Broadway production at the Lunt-Fontanne Theatre in 1964–5, the longest-running Hamlet in the U.S. to date. A live film of the production was produced using "Electronovision", a method of recording a live performance with multiple video cameras and converting the image to film. [ 188 ] Eileen Herlie repeated her role from Olivier's film version as the Queen, and the voice of Gielgud was heard as the Ghost. The Gielgud/Burton production was also recorded complete and released on LP by Columbia Masterworks . Sarah Bernhardt as Hamlet, with Yorick 's skull (Photographer: James Lafayette , c. 1885–1900) The first Hamlet in color was a 1969 film directed by Tony Richardson with Nicol Williamson as Hamlet and Marianne Faithfull as Ophelia. In 1990 Franco Zeffirelli , whose Shakespeare films have been described as "sensual rather than cerebral", [ 189 ] cast Mel Gibson —then famous for the Mad Max and Lethal Weapon movies—in the title role of his 1990 version ; Glenn Close —then famous as the psychotic "other woman" in Fatal Attraction —played Gertrude, [ 190 ] and Paul Scofield played Hamlet's father. [ 191 ] In contrast to Zeffirelli, whose Hamlet was heavily cut, Kenneth Branagh adapted, directed, and starred in a 1996 version containing every word of Shakespeare's play, combining the material from the F1 and Q2 texts. Branagh's Hamlet runs for around four hours. [ 192 ] Branagh set the film with late 19th-century costuming and furnishings; [ 193 ] and Blenheim Palace , built in the early 18th century, became Elsinore Castle in the external scenes. The film is structured as an epic and makes frequent use of flashbacks to highlight elements not made explicit in the play: Hamlet's sexual relationship with Kate Winslet 's Ophelia, for example, or his childhood affection for Yorick (played by Ken Dodd ). [ 194 ] In 2000, Michael Almereyda 's Hamlet set the story in contemporary Manhattan , with Ethan Hawke playing Hamlet as a film student. Claudius (played by Kyle MacLachlan ) became the CEO of "Denmark Corporation", having taken over the company by killing his brother. [ 195 ] Notable made-for-television productions of Hamlet include those starring Christopher Plummer (1964), Richard Chamberlain (1970; Hallmark Hall of Fame ), Derek Jacobi (1980; Royal Shakespeare Company , BBC), Kevin Kline (1990), Campbell Scott (2000) and David Tennant (2009; Royal Shakespeare Company , BBC). [ 196 ] There have also been several films that transposed the general storyline of Hamlet or elements thereof to other settings. There have also been many films which included performances of scenes from Hamlet as a play-within-a-film. See Hamlet on screen for further details. Stage pastiches [ edit ] There have been various "derivative works" of Hamlet which recast the story from the point of view of other characters, or transpose the story into a new setting or act as sequels or prequels to Hamlet . This section is limited to those written for the stage. The best-known is Tom Stoppard's 1966 play Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead , which retells many of the events of the story from the point of view of the characters Rosencrantz and Guildenstern and gives them a backstory of their own. The play was nominated for eight Tony Awards, and won four: Best Play, Scenic and Costume Design, and Producer; the director and the three leading actors were nominated but did not win. It also won Best Play from the New York Drama Critics Circle in 1968, and Outstanding Production from the Outer Critics Circle in 1969. Several times since 1995, the American Shakespeare Center has mounted repertories that included both Hamlet and Rosencrantz and Guildenstern , with the same actors performing the same roles in each; in their 2001 and 2009 seasons the two plays were "directed, designed, and rehearsed together to make the most out of the shared scenes and situations". [ 197 ] W.S. Gilbert wrote a comic play titled Rosencrantz and Guildenstern , in which Guildenstern helps Rosencrantz vie with Hamlet to make Ophelia his bride. Lee Blessing 's Fortinbras is a comical sequel to Hamlet in which all the deceased characters come back as ghosts. The New York Times reviewed the play, saying it is "scarcely more than an extended comedy sketch, lacking the portent and linguistic complexity of Tom Stoppard's Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead. Fortinbras operates on a far less ambitious plane, but it is a ripping yarn and offers Keith Reddin a role in which he can commit comic mayhem." [ 198 ] Heiner Müller 's postmodern drama The Hamletmachine was first produced in Paris by director Jean Jourdheuil in 1979. This play in turn inspired Giannina Braschi 's dramatic novel United States of Banana , which takes place at the Statue of Liberty in post-9/11 New York City. In it, Hamlet, Zarathustra , and Giannina are on a quest to free the Puerto Rican prisoner Segismundo from the dungeon of Liberty, where Segismundo's father, Basilio, the King of the United States of Banana, imprisoned him for the crime of having been born. The work intertwines the plots and characters of Pedro Calderón de la Barca 's Life Is a Dream with Shakespeare's Hamlet . Caridad Svich 's 12 Ophelias (a play with broken songs) includes elements of the story of Hamlet but focuses on Ophelia. In Svich's play, Ophelia is resurrected and rises from a pool of water, after her death in Hamlet . The play is a series of scenes and songs, and was first staged at public swimming pool in Brooklyn. [ 199 ] Heidi Weiss of the Chicago Sun-Times said of the play, "Far more surreal and twisted than Tom Stoppard's Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead, 12 Ophelias is a reminder of just how morphable and mysterious Shakespeare's original remains." [ 200 ] Other characters are renamed: Hamlet is Rude Boy, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are androgynous helpers known simply as R and G, Gertrude is the madam of a brothel, Horatio becomes H and continues to be Hamlet's best friend/confidante, and a chorus of Ophelias serves as guide. A new character, Mina, is introduced, and she is a whore in Gertrude's brothel. David Davalos ' Wittenberg is a "tragical-comical-historical" prequel to Hamlet that depicts the Danish prince as a student at Wittenberg University (now known as the University of Halle-Wittenberg ), where he is torn between the conflicting teachings of his mentors John Faustus and Martin Luther . The New York Times reviewed the play, saying, "Mr. Davalos has molded a daft campus comedy out of this unlikely convergence," [ 201 ] and nytheatre' s review said the playwright "has imagined a fascinating alternate reality, and quite possibly, given the fictional Hamlet a back story that will inform the role for the future." [ 202 ] See also [ edit ] Critical approaches to Hamlet Ghost stories References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] All references to Hamlet , unless otherwise specified, are taken from the Arden Shakespeare Q2 (Thompson and Taylor, 2006a). Under their referencing system, 3.1.55 means act 3, scene 1, line 55. References to the First Quarto and First Folio are marked Hamlet Q1 and Hamlet F1 , respectively, and are taken from the Arden Shakespeare "Hamlet: the texts of 1603 and 1623" (Thompson and Taylor, 2006b). Their referencing system for Q1 has no act breaks, so 7.115 means scene 7, line 115. ^ Thompson and Taylor (2006a, 74). ^ a b Taylor (2002, 18). ^ Crystal and Crystal (2005, 66). ^ Thompson and Taylor (2006a, 17), who are quoting McKernan and Terris in an unpublished program note (1994). ^ a b See Taylor (2002, 4); Banham (1998, 141); Hattaway asserts that "Richard Burbage ... played Hieronimo and also Richard III but then was the first Hamlet, Lear, and Othello" (1982, 91); Peter Thomson argues that the identity of Hamlet as Burbage is built into the dramaturgy of several moments of the play: "we will profoundly misjudge the position if we do not recognise that, whilst this is Hamlet talking about the groundlings, it is also Burbage talking to the groundlings" (1983, 24); see also Thomson on the first player's beard (1983, 110). ^ Hamlet 1.4. ^ a b The Gravedigger Scene : Hamlet 5.1.1–205. ^ Saxo and Hansen (1983, 36–37). ^ Saxo and Hansen (1983, 16–25). ^ Saxo and Hansen (1983, 5–15). ^ Books 3 & 4 – see online text ^ Saxo and Hansen (1983, 1–5). ^ Saxo and Hansen (1983, 25–37). ^ Edwards (1985, 1–2). ^ Saxo and Hansen (1983, 66–67). ^ Jenkins (1982, 82–85). ^ Saxo and Hansen (1983, 67). ^ In his 1936 book The Problem of Hamlet: A Solution Andrew Cairncross asserted that the Hamlet referred to in 1589 was written by Shakespeare; Peter Alexander (1964), Eric Sams (according to Jackson 1991, 267) and, more recently, Harold Bloom (2001, xiii and 383; 2003, 154) have agreed. Harold Jenkins, the editor of the second series Arden edition of the play, considers that there are not grounds for thinking that the Ur-Hamlet is an early work by Shakespeare, which he then rewrote. (1982, 84 n4). ^ Saxo and Hansen (1983, 66–68). ^ Saxo and Hansen (1983, 6). ^ Greenblatt (2004a, 311); Greenblatt (2004b). ^ Shakespeare's Last Will and Testament . ^ Chambers (1930) 418: J.D. Wilson (1932) 104: Rowse (1963) 323. ^ Lilian Winstanley, Hamlet and the Scottish Succession, Cambridge University Press, 1921, 114. ^ William Ceccil, Lord Burghley. “Ten Precepts”. Craik, Henry. English Prose; Vol. I. Fourteenth to Sixteenth Century . New York: The Macmillan Company. (1916) ^ H.Jenkins (ed.) Hamlet , Methuen, 1982, p. 35. ^ Polonius was close to the Latin name for Robert Pullen , founder of Oxford University, and Reynaldo too close for safety to John Rainolds , the President of Corpus Christi College . G. R. Hibbard (ed.) Hamlet, Oxford University Press, 1987, pp.74–5. ^ MacCary suggests 1599 or 1600 (1998, 13); James Shapiro offers late 1600 or early 1601 (2005, 341); Wells and Taylor suggest that the play was written in 1600 and revised later (1988, 653); the New Cambridge editor settles on mid-1601 (Edwards 1985, 8); the New Swan Shakespeare Advanced Series editor agrees with 1601 (Lott 1970, xlvi); Thompson and Taylor, tentatively ("according to whether one is the more persuaded by Jenkins or by Honigmann") suggest a terminus ad quem of either Spring 1601 or sometime in 1600 (2001a, 58–59). ^ MacCary (1998, 12–13) and Edwards (1985, 5–6). ^ a b Lott (1970, xlvi). ^ Hamlet F1 2.2.337. The whole conversation between Rozencrantz, Guildenstern and Hamlet concerning the touring players' departure from the city is at Hamlet "F1" 2.2.324–360. ^ Duncan-Jones, Catherine (2001). "Do the boys carry it away?". Ungentle Shakespeare: scenes from his life . London: Arden Shakespeare . pp. 143–9. ISBN 1-903436-26-5 . ^ Edwards (1985, 5). ^ Hattaway (1987, 13–20). ^ Chambers (1923, vol. 3, 486–487) and Halliday (1964, 204–205). ^ Thompson and Taylor (2006a, 465). ^ Halliday (1964, 204). ^ a b Thompson and Taylor (2006a, 78). ^ Hibbard (1987, 22–23). ^ Hattaway (1987, 16). ^ Thompson and Taylor published Q2, with appendices, in their first volume (2006a) and the F1 and Q1 texts in their second volume (2006b). Bate and Rasmussen (2007) is the F1 text with additional Q2 passages in an appendix. The New Cambridge series has begun to publish separate volumes for the separate quarto versions that exist of Shakespeare's plays (Irace 1998). ^ Hamlet 3.4 and 4.1. ^ Thompson and Taylor (2006a, 543–552). ^ Jenkins (1982, 14). ^ Hamlet Q1 14. ^ Jackson (1986, 171). ^ Irace (1998); Thompson and Taylor (2006a, 85–86). ^ Thompson and Taylor (2006b, 36–37) and Checklist of Q1 Productions in Thompson and Taylor (2006b, 38–39). ^ Wofford (1994) and Kirsch (1968). ^ Vickers (1974a, 447) and (1974b, 92). ^ Wofford (1994, 184–185). ^ Vickers (1974c, 5). ^ Wofford (1994, 185). ^ a b Wofford (1994, 186). ^ Rosenberg (1992, 179). ^ MacCary (1998, 67–72, 84). ^ Based on the length of the first edition of The Riverside Shakespeare (1974). ^ Also used in Love's Labour's Lost and A Midsummer Night's Dream . Kermode (2000, 256). ^ Adamson, Sylvia; Hunter, Lynette; Magnusson, Lynne; Thompson, Ann; Wales, Katie (1 Oct 2010). Arden Shakespeare: Reading Shakespeare's Dramatic Language . Los Angeles: Arden. ISBN 978-1-903436-29-5 . ^ MacCary (1998, 84–85). ^ Hamlet 3.1.63–64. ^ Hamlet 1.2.85–86. ^ MacCary (1998, 89–90). ^ Hamlet 3.1.87–148 especially lines 120, 129, 136, 139 and 148. ^ This is widely interpreted as having a double meaning, since 'nunnery' was slang for a brothel. Pauline Kiernan, Filthy Shakespeare , Quercus, 2006, p. 34. This interpretation has been challenged by Jenkins (1982, 493–495; also H. D. F. Kitto) on the grounds of insufficient and inconclusive evidence of a precedent for this meaning; Jenkins states that the literal meaning is better suited to the dramatic context. ^ Oxford English Dictionary (2004, CD). ^ Hamlet 2.1.63–65. ^ Hamlet 3.1.151 and 3.1.154. The Nunnery Scene : Hamlet 3.1.87–160. ^ MacCary (1998, 87–88). ^ Pauline Kiernan, Filthy Shakespeare: Shakespeare's Most Outrageous Sexual Puns , Quercus, 2006, p.34 ^ MacCary (1998, 37–38); in the New Testament , see Romans 12:19: " 'vengeance is mine, I will repay' sayeth the Lord". ^ MacCary (1998, 38). ^ Asimov, Asimov's Guide to Shakespeare(1970, 92) ^ Hamlet F1 2.2.247–248. ^ MacCary (1998, 47–48). ^ Hamlet 3.1.55–87 especially line 55. ^ MacCary (1998, 49). ^ Knowles (1999, 1049 and 1052–1053) cited by Thompson and Taylor (2006a, 73–74); MacCary (1998, 49). ^ Hamlet Act II, scene 2 "and indeed, it goes so heavily with my disposition; that this goodly frame the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most excellent canopy the air, look you, this brave o'er hanging firmament, this majestical roof, fretted with golden fire: why, it appeareth no other thing to me, than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a piece of work is a man! How noble in reason, how infinite in faculty! In form and moving how express and admirable! In action how like an Angel! in apprehension how like a god! The beauty of the world! The paragon of animals! And yet to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man delights not me; no, nor woman neither, though by your smiling you seem to say so." ^ http://www.dominiopublico.gov.br/pesquisa/DetalheObraForm.do?select_action=&co_obra=110021 ^ Arthur Schopenhauer, The World as Will and Representation , Vol. I, translated by E.F.J. Payne, Dover Publications, 1969, pp. 266-267. ^ a b Freud (1900, 367). ^ a b c d e Britton (1995, 207–211). ^ Freud (1900, 368). ^ The nunnery conversation referred to in this sentence is Hamlet 3.1.87–160. ^ Allan, Davin (1 May 2013). "Sexual Indifference in Shakespeare's Hamlet" . Literatured . Retrieved 29 March 2014 . ^ Morrison (1997: 4; 129–30) ^ Cotsell (2005: 191) ^ The American Journal of Psychology 21.1 (January, 1910): 72–113. ^ The Closet Scene : Hamlet 3.4. ^ MacCary (1998, 104–107, 113–116) and de Grazia (2007, 168–170). ^ Smallwood (2002, 102). ^ a b Bloom, Harold; Foster, Brett, eds. (2008). Bloom's Shakespeare Through the Ages: Hamlet . New York: Chelsea House. p. xii. ISBN 978-0791095928 . Electronic edition co-published by Infobase Learning. ^ Rothman, Joshua - "Hamlet: A Love Story", The New Yorker , August 14, 2013. Retrieved 2015-12-11 ^ Gontar, David P. (2013). Hamlet Made Simple and Other Essays . New English Review Press. ISBN 978-0985439491 . [ pages needed ] ^ Hamlet 4.5. ^ Wofford (1994, 199–202). ^ Howard (2003, 411–415). ^ Heilbrun (1957) ^ Bloom (2003, 58–59); Thompson (2001, 4). ^ Bloom, Harold. Hamlet: Poem Unlimited. "There is a recent 'Be kind to Gertrude' fashion among some feminist critics..." ^ Showalter (1985). ^ Bloom (2003, 57). ^ MacCary (1998, 111–113). ^ Hamlet has 208 quotations in The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations ; it takes up 10 of 85 pages dedicated to Shakespeare in the 1986 Bartlett's Familiar Quotations (14th ed. 1968) . For examples of lists of the greatest books, see Harvard Classics , Great Books , Great Books of the Western World , Harold Bloom 's The Western Canon , St. John's College reading list , and Columbia College Core Curriculum . ^ Osborne (2007, 114–133 especially 115 and 120). ^ a b c d e Thompson and Taylor (2006a, 123–126). ^ Welsh (2001, 131). ^ a b Thompson and Taylor (2006a, 126–131). ^ Novy (1994, 62, 77–78). ^ Hamlet 3.1.55–87. ^ Writing in La Jeune Belgique in 1890; quoted by Braun (1982, 40). ^ Taylor (2002, 13). ^ Thompson and Taylor (2006a; 53–55); Chambers (1930, vol. 1, 334), cited by Dawson (2002, 176). ^ Dawson (2002, 176). ^ Pitcher and Woudhuysen (1969, 204). ^ Hibbard (1987, 17). ^ Marsden (2002, 21). ^ Holland (2007, 34). ^ Marsden (2002, 21–22). ^ Samuel Pepys records his delight at the novelty of Hamlet "done with scenes"; see Thompson and Taylor (1996, 57). ^ Taylor (1989, 16). ^ Thompson and Taylor (2006a, 98–99). ^ Letter to Sir William Young, 10 January 1773, quoted by Uglow (1977, 473). ^ Morrison (2002, 231). ^ Moody (2002, 41). ^ Moody (2002, 44), quoting Sheridan . ^ Gay (2002, 159). ^ Dawson (2002, 185–187). ^ Morrison (2002, 232–233). ^ Morrison (2002, 235–237). ^ William Winter, New York Tribune 26 October 1875, quoted by Morrison (2002, 241). ^ Morrison (2002, 241). ^ Schoch (2002, 58–75). ^ George Bernard Shaw in The Saturday Review 2 October 1897, quoted in Shaw (1961, 81). ^ Moody (2002, 54). ^ Halliday (1964, 204) and O'Connor (2002, 77). ^ Sarah Bernhardt , in a letter to the London Daily Telegraph , quoted by Gay (2002, 164). ^ Holland (2002, 203–205). ^ Dawson (2002, 184). ^ Dawson (2002, 188). ^ a b c Gillies et al. (2002, 259–262). ^ Dawson (2002, 180). ^ For more on this production, see the MAT production of Hamlet article. Craig and Stanislavski began planning the production in 1908 but, due to a serious illness of Stanislavski's, it was delayed until December, 1911. See Benedetti (1998, 188–211). ^ Benedetti (1999, 189, 195). ^ On Craig's relationship to Symbolism , Russian symbolism , and its principles of monodrama in particular, see Taxidou (1998, 38–41); on Craig's staging proposals, see Innes (1983, 153); on the centrality of the protagonist and his mirroring of the 'authorial self', see Taxidou (1998, 181, 188) and Innes (1983, 153). ^ The First Court Scene : Hamlet 1.2.1–128. A brightly lit, golden pyramid descended from Claudius's throne, representing the feudal hierarchy , giving the illusion of a single, unified mass of bodies. In the dark, shadowy foreground, separated by a gauze , Hamlet lay, as if dreaming. On Claudius's exit-line the figures remained but the gauze was loosened, so that they appeared to melt away as if Hamlet's thoughts had turned elsewhere. For this effect, the scene received an ovation , which was unheard of at the MAT . See Innes (1983, 152). ^ See Innes (1983, 140–175; esp. 165–167 on the use of the screens). ^ Innes (1983, 172). ^ Hortmann (2002, 214). ^ Hortmann (2002, 223). ^ Burian (1993), quoted by Hortmann (2002, 224–225). ^ a b c Gillies et al. (2002, 267–269). ^ Morrison (2002, 247–248); Thompson and Taylor (2006a, 109). ^ Morrison (2002, 249). ^ Morrison (2002, 249–250). ^ "A Pictorial History of the American Stage" by Daniel Blum, Crown Publishers, Inc. 1981, pp.307 ^ "Olivier" by Robert Tanitch, Abbeville Press, 1985 ^ Smallwood (2002, 108); National Theatre reviews Retrieved: 4 December 2007. ^ Vincent Canby, "Theatre Review: Ralph Fiennes as Mod Hamlet," The New York Times 3 May 1995. ^ Gussow, Mel. "Review/Theater; A High-Keyed Hamlet ", The New York Times , April 3, 1992 ^ Guernsey, Otis and Jeffrey Sweet (eds.) The Applause Best Plays Theater Yearbook 1991–1992 , Hal Leonard Corp., p. 43. ISBN 9781557831477 ^ Ari Panagako, "Dandy Hamlet Bows Uptown", Heights/Inwood Press of North Manhattan , 14 June 1978. ^ According to the Internet Broadway Database "show" . Romeo and Juliet is the second most-produced Shakespeare play on Broadway, with thirty-four different productions, followed by Twelfth Night , with thirty. ^ Ian McKellen, Alan Bates, Hugh Hudson, et al. For Ian Charleson: A Tribute . London: Constable and Company, 1990. p. 124. ^ Barratt, Mark. Ian McKellen: An Unofficial Biography. Virgin Books, 2005. p. 63. ^ "The Readiness Was All: Ian Charleson and Richard Eyre's Hamlet ," by Richard Allan Davison. In Shakespeare: Text and Theater , Lois Potter and Arthur F. Kinney, eds. Newark: University of Delaware Press, 1999. pp. 170–182 ^ Billington, Michael (6 August 2008). "From Time Lord to antic prince: David Tennant is the best Hamlet in years" . The Guardian (London). ^ Billington, Michael (4 May 2001). "Theatre: Hamlet" . The Guardian (London). ^ Gardner, Lyn (8 November 2002). "Hamlet, West Yorkshire Playhouse, Leeds" . The Guardian (London). ^ John B. Barrois/New Orleans Shakespeare Festival (2012-06-28). "Summer action hero? Tulane Shakespeare Fest opens with a Hamlet out for revenge" . NOLA.com . Retrieved 2013-09-14 . ^ Mark Shenton, "Jude Law to Star in Donmar's Hamlet." The Stage . 10 September 2007. Retrieved 19 November 2007. ^ "Cook, Eyre, Lee And More Join Jude Law In Grandage's HAMLET." broadwayworld.com. 4 February 2009. Retrieved 18 February 2009. ^ "Jude Law to play Hamlet at 'home' Kronborg Castle." The Daily Mirror . 10 July 2009. Retrieved 14 July 2009. ^ "Shakespeare's Hamlet with Jude Law". Charlie Rose Show . video 53:55, 2 October 2009. Retrieved 6 October 2009. ^ Dave Itzkoff, "Donmar Warehouse's 'Hamlet' Coming to Broadway With Jude Law." New York Times . 30 June 2009. Retrieved 10 September 2009. ^ "Marshall Fine: Onstage: Paul Giamatti in Hamlet" . Huffingtonpost.com. 2013-04-10 . Retrieved 2015-07-11 . ^ "Globe to Globe Hamlet" . Retrieved 23 February 2016 . ^ Stewart, Rachel (11 August 2014). "Cumberbatch's Hamlet most in-demand show of all time" . The Daily Telegraph (London). ^ Calia, Michael (11 August 2014). "Benedict Cumberbatch as 'Hamlet' Opens Next Year, And Is Now Sold Out - Speakeasy - WSJ" . The Wall Street Journal . ^ Hamlet Starring Benedict Cumberbatch: Official Site ^ The Fencing Scene : Hamlet 5.2.203–387. ^ a b c Brode (2001, 117–118). ^ Davies (2000, 171). ^ Fox, Margalit (2009-09-20). "Jack Manning obituary" . New York Times . Retrieved 2013-09-14 . ^ "Innokenti Smoktunovsky – Biography – Movies & TV" . Movies.nytimes.com . Retrieved 29 May 2010 . ^ Guntner (2000, 120–121). ^ Brode (2001, 125–127). ^ From Cartmell (2000, 212), Zeffirelli says he is trying to make Shakespeare "even more popular" in an interview quoted here given to The South Bank Show in December 1997. ^ Guntner (2000, 121–122). ^ IMDB listing for Hamlet ^ Crowl (2000, 232). ^ Starks (1999, 272). ^ Keyishian (2000, 78–79). ^ Burnett (2000). ^ Hamlet Great Performances , PBS ^ Warren, Jim. "Director's Notes" . American Shakespeare Center . Retrieved 20 June 2009 . ^ Gussow, Mel (14 October 1992). "Theater in Review" . New York Times . Retrieved 26 June 2011 . ^ David G. Schultz (July 2008). "A Play at Poolside: Caridad Svich's 12 Ophelias" . The Brooklyn Rail . Retrieved 26 June 2011 . ^ Quoted in promotional material of "The Magdalena Project: international network of women in contemporary theatre" at [1] ^ Grode, Eric (30 March 2011). "Theater in Review" . New York Times . Retrieved 10 December 2011 . ^ "Wittenberg" . Nytheatre.com. 2011-03-19 . Retrieved 2013-09-14 . Editions of Hamlet [ edit ] Bate, Jonathan, and Eric Rasmussen, eds. 2007. Complete Works . By William Shakespeare. The RSC Shakespeare. New York: Modern Library. ISBN 0-679-64295-1 . Edwards, Phillip, ed. 1985. Hamlet, Prince of Denmark . New Cambridge Shakespeare ser. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-29366-9 . Hibbard, G. R., ed. 1987. Hamlet . Oxford World's Classics ser. Oxford. ISBN 0-19-283416-9 . Hoy, Cyrus, ed. 1992. Hamlet . Norton Critical Edition ser. 2nd ed. New York: Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-95663-4 . Irace, Kathleen O. 1998. The First Quarto of Hamlet . New Cambridge Shakespeare ser. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-65390-8 . Jenkins, Harold, ed. 1982. Hamlet . The Arden Shakespeare, second ser. London: Methuen. ISBN 1-903436-67-2 . Lott, Bernard, ed. 1970. Hamlet . New Swan Shakespeare Advanced ser. New ed. London: Longman. ISBN 0-582-52742-2 . Spencer, T. J. B., ed. 1980 Hamlet . New Penguin Shakespeare ser. London: Penguin. ISBN 0-14-070734-4 . Thompson, Ann and Neil Taylor, eds. 2006a. Hamlet . The Arden Shakespeare, third ser. Volume one. London: Arden. ISBN 1-904271-33-2 . ———. 2006b. Hamlet: The Texts of 1603 and 1623 . The Arden Shakespeare, third ser. Volume two. London: Arden. ISBN 1-904271-80-4 . Wells, Stanley, and Gary Taylor, eds. 1988. The Complete Works . By William Shakespeare. The Oxford Shakespeare. Compact ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press; New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-871190-5 . Secondary sources [ edit ] Alexander, Peter. 1964. Alexander's Introductions to Shakespeare . London: Collins. Banham, Martin, ed. 1998. The Cambridge Guide to Theatre . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-43437-8 . Baskerville, Charles Read. ed. 1934. Elizabethan and Stuart Plays . New York: Henry Holt and Company. Benedetti, Jean. 1999. Stanislavski: His Life and Art . Revised edition. Original edition published in 1988. London: Methuen. ISBN 0-413-52520-1 . Blits, Jan H. 2001. Introduction. In Deadly Thought: "Hamlet" and the Human Soul : 3–22. Langham, MD: Lexington Books. ISBN 0-7391-0214-1 . Bloom, Harold . 2001. Shakespeare: The Invention of the Human . Open Market ed. Harlow, Essex: Longman. ISBN 1-57322-751-X . ———. 2003. Hamlet: Poem Unlimited . Edinburgh: Canongate. ISBN 1-84195-461-6 . Braun, Edward. 1982. The Director and the Stage: From Naturalism to Grotowski . London: Methuen. ISBN 978-0-413-46300-5 . Britton, Celia. 1995. "Structuralist and poststructuralist psychoanalytic and Marxist theories" in Cambridge History of Literary Criticism: From Formalism to Poststructuralism (Vol 8) . Ed. Raman Seldon. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1995. ISBN 978-0-521-30013-1 . Brode, Douglas. 2001. Shakespeare in the Movies: From the Silent Era to Today . New York: Berkley Boulevard Books. ISBN 0-425-18176-6 . Brown, John Russell. 2006. Hamlet: A Guide to the Text and its Theatrical Life . Shakespeare Handbooks ser. Basingstoke, Hampshire and New York: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 1-4039-2092-3 . Buchanan, Judith. 2005. Shakespeare on Film . Harlow: Pearson. ISBN 0-582-43716-4 . Buchanan, Judith. 2009. Shakespeare on Silent Film: An Excellent Dumb Discourse . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-87199-9 . Burian, Jarka. 1993. "Hamlet in Postwar Czech Theatre". In Foreign Shakespeare: Contemporary Performance . Ed. Dennis Kennedy. New edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004. ISBN 0-521-61708-1 . Burnett, Mark Thornton. 2000. " 'To Hear and See the Matter': Communicating Technology in Michael Almereyda's Hamlet (2000)". Cinema Journal 42.3: 48–69. Carincross, Andrew S. 1936. The Problem of Hamlet: A Solution . Reprint ed. Norwood, PA.: Norwood Editions, 1975. ISBN 0-88305-130-3 . Cartmell, Deborah. 2000. "Franco Zeffirelli and Shakespeare". In Jackson (2000, 212–221). Chambers, Edmund Kerchever. 1923. The Elizabethan Stage . 4 volumes. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-811511-3 . ———. 1930. William Shakespeare: A Study of Facts and Problems . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988. ISBN 0-19-811774-4 . Cotsell, Michael (2005). "The Matriarchal Offense". The Theater of Trauma: American modernist drama and the psychological struggle for the American Mind . New York: Peter Lang. ISBN 978-0-8204-7466-3 . Crowl, Samuel. 2000. "Flamboyant Realist: Kenneth Branagh". In Jackson (2000, 222–240). Crystal, David, and Ben Crystal. 2005. The Shakespeare Miscellany . New York: Penguin. ISBN 0-14-051555-0 . Davies, Anthony. 2000. "The Shakespeare films of Laurence Olivier". In Jackson (2000, 163–182). Dawson, Anthony B. 1995. Hamlet . Shakespeare in Performance ser. New ed. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1997. ISBN 0-7190-4625-4 . ———. 2002. "International Shakespeare". In Wells and Stanton (2002, 174–193). Eliot, T. S. 1920. "Hamlet and his Problems" . In The Sacred Wood: Essays in Poetry and Criticism . London: Faber & Gwyer. ISBN 0-416-37410-7 . Foakes, R. A. 1993. Hamlet versus Lear: Cultural Politics and Shakespeare's Art . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-60705-1 . French, George Russell. 1869. Shakspeareana Geologica . London: Macmillan. Reprinted New York: AMS, 1975. ISBN 0-404-02575-7 . Freud, Sigmund . 1900. The Interpretation of Dreams . Trans. James Strachey. Ed. Angela Richards. The Penguin Freud Library, vol. 4. London: Penguin, 1991. ISBN 0-14-013794-7 . Gay, Penny. 2002. "Women and Shakespearean Performance". In Wells and Stanton (2002, 155–173). Gillies, John, Ryuta Minami, Ruru Li, and Poonam Trivedi. 2002. "Shakespeare on the Stages of Asia". In Wells and Stanton (2002, 259–283). Greenblatt, Stephen. 2004a. Will in the World: How Shakespeare Became Shakespeare . New York: W.W. Norton & Co. ISBN 0-393-05057-2 . ———. 2004b. "The Death of Hamnet and the Making of Hamlet" . N.Y. Review of Books 51.16 (21 Oct. 2004). Greg, Walter Wilson. 1955. The Shakespeare First Folio, its Bibliographical and Textual History . Oxford: Clarendon Press. ASIN B0000CHBCM. Guntner, J. Lawrence. 2000. " Hamlet , Macbeth and King Lear on film". In Jackson (2000, 117–134). Halliday, F. E. 1964. A Shakespeare Companion 1564–1964 . Shakespeare Library ser. Baltimore, Penguin, 1969. ISBN 0-14-053011-8 . Hattaway, Michael. 1982. Elizabethan Popular Theatre: Plays in Performance . Theatre Production ser. London and Boston: Routledge and Kegan Paul. ISBN 0-7100-9052-8 . ———. 1987. Hamlet . The Critics Debate ser. Basingstoke, Hampshire: Macmillan. ISBN 0-333-38524-1 . Heilbrun, Carolyn . 1957. "The Character of Hamlet's Mother". Shakespeare Quarterly 8.2: 201–206. Holland, Peter. 2002. "Touring Shakespeare". In Wells and Stanton (2002, 194–211). ———. 2007. "Shakespeare Abbreviated". In Shaughnessy (2007, 26–45). Hortmann, Wilhelm. 2002. "Shakespeare on the Political Stage in the Twentieth Century". In Wells and Stanton (2002, 212–229). Howard, Jean E. 2003. "Feminist Criticism". In Shakespeare: An Oxford Guide : 411–423. Ed. Stanley Wells and Lena Orlin. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-924522-3 . Howard, Tony. 2000. "Shakespeare's Cinematic Offshoots". In Jackson (2000, 303–323). Hurstfield, Joel, and James Sutherland. 1964. Shakespeare's World . New York: St. Martin's Press. Innes, Christopher. 1983. Edward Gordon Craig . Directors in Perspective ser. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-27383-8 . Jackson, MacDonald P. 1986. "The Transmission of Shakespeare's Text". In The Cambridge Companion to Shakespeare Studies Ed. Stanley Wells. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-31841-6 . 163–185. ———. 1991. "Editions and Textual Studies Reviewed". In Shakespeare Survey 43, The Tempest and After : 255–270. Ed. Stanley Wells. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-39529-1 . Jackson, Russell, ed. 2000. The Cambridge Companion to Shakespeare on Film . Cambridge Companions to Literature ser. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-63975-1 . Jenkins, Harold. 1955. "The Relation Between the Second Quarto and the Folio Text of Hamlet ". Studies in Bibliography 7: 69–83. Jones, Gwilym. 2007. Thomas Middleton at the Globe . London: Globe Theatre education resource centre. Retrieved: 30 December 2007. Kermode, Frank. 2000. Shakespeare's Language . London: Penguin. ISBN 0-14-028592-X . Keyishian, Harry. 2000. "Shakespeare and Movie Genre: The Case of Hamlet ". In Jackson (2000, 72–84). Kirsch, A. C. 1968. "A Caroline Commentary on the Drama". Modern Philology 66: 256–261. Knowles, Ronald. 1999. "Hamlet and Counter-Humanism" Renaissance Quarterly 52.4: 1046–1069. Lacan, Jacques . 1959. "Desire and the Interpretation of Desire in Hamlet ". In Literature and Psychoanalysis: The Question of Reading Otherwise . Ed. Shoshana Felman. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982. Originally appeared as a double issue of Yale French Studies , nos. 55/56 (1977). ISBN 0-8018-2754-X . Lennard, John . 2007. William Shakespeare: Hamlet . Literature Insights ser. Humanities-Ebooks, 2007. ISBN 1-84760-028-X . MacCary, W. Thomas. 1998. "Hamlet": A Guide to the Play . Greenwood Guides to Shakespeare ser. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN 0-313-30082-8 . Marsden, Jean I. 2002. "Improving Shakespeare: from the Restoration to Garrick". In Wells and Stanton (2002, 21–36). Matheson, Mark. 1995. "Hamlet and 'A Matter Tender and Dangerous' ". Shakespeare Quarterly 46.4: 383–397. Moody, Jane. 2002. "Romantic Shakespeare". In Wells and Stanton (2002, 37–57). Morrison, Michael A. 2002. "Shakespeare in North America". In Wells and Stanton (2002, 230–258). ——— 1997. John Barrymore, Shakespearean Actor . Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-62028-7 . Novy, Marianne. 1994. Engaging with Shakespeare: Responses of George Eliot and Other Women Novelists . (Athens, Georgia) in Thompson and Taylor (2006a, 127). O'Connor, Marion. 2002. "Reconstructive Shakespeare: Reproducing Elizabethan and Jacobean Stages". In Wells and Stanton (2002, 76–97). Osborne, Laurie. 2007. "Narration and Staging in Hamlet and its afternovels" in Shaughnessy (2007, 114–133). Oxford English Dictionary (Second Edition) on CD-ROM version 3.1. 2004. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-861016-8 . Pennington, Michael. 1996. "Hamlet": A User's Guide . London: Nick Hern. ISBN 1-85459-284-X . Pitcher, John, and Woudhuysen, Henry. 1969. Shakespeare Companion, 1564–1964 . London: Penguin. ISBN 0-14-053011-8 . Quillian, William H. Hamlet and the New Poetic: James Joyce and T. S. Eliot . Ann Arbor, MI:UMI Research Press, 1983. Rosenberg, Marvin. 1992. The Masks of Hamlet . London: Associated University Presses. ISBN 0-87413-480-3 . Rowse, Alfred Leslie. 1963. William Shakespeare: A Biography . New York: Harper & Row. Reprinted New York: Barnes & Noble Books, 1995. ISBN 1-56619-804-6 . Saxo , and Hansen, William. 1983. Saxo Grammaticus & the Life of Hamlet . Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 0-8032-2318-8 . Schoch, Richard W. 2002. "Pictorial Shakespeare". In Wells and Stanton (2002, 58–75). Shapiro, James. 2005. 1599: A Year in the Life of William Shakespeare . London: Faber, 2006. ISBN 0-571-21481-9 . Shaughnessy, Robert. 2007. The Cambridge Companion to Shakespeare and Popular Culture . Cambridge Companions to Literature ser. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-60580-9 . Shaw, George Bernard . 1961. Shaw on Shakespeare . Ed. Edwin Wilson. New York: Applause. ISBN 1-55783-561-6 . Showalter, Elaine . 1985. "Representing Ophelia: Women, Madness, and the Responsibilities of Feminist Criticism" In Shakespeare and the Question of Theory : 77–94. Ed. Patricia Parker and Geoffrey Hartman. New York and London: Methuen. ISBN 0-416-36930-8 . Smallwood, Robert. 2002. "Twentieth-century Performance: The Stratford and London Companies". In Wells and Stanton (2002, 98–117). Starks, Lisa S. 1999. "The Displaced Body of Desire: Sexuality in Kenneth Branagh's Hamlet ". In Shakespeare and Appropriation : 160–178. Ed. Christy Desmet and Robert Sawyer. Accents on Shakespeare ser. London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-20725-8 . Taxidou, Olga. 1998. The Mask: A Periodical Performance by Edward Gordon Craig . Contemporary Theatre Studies ser. volume 30. Amsterdam: Harwood Academic Publishers. ISBN 90-5755-046-6 . Taylor, Gary . 1989. Reinventing Shakespeare: A Cultural History from the Restoration to the Present . London: Hogarth Press. ISBN 0-7012-0888-0 . ———. 2002. "Shakespeare Plays on Renaissance Stages". In Wells and Stanton (2002, 1–20). Teraoka, Arlene Akiko. 1985. The Silence of Entropy or Universal Discourse : the Postmodernist Poetics of Heiner Müller . New York: Peter Lang. ISBN 0-8204-0190-0 . Thompson, Ann. 2001. "Shakespeare and sexuality" in Catherine M S Alexander and Stanley Wells Shakespeare and Sexuality : 1–13. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-80475-2 . Thompson, Ann and Taylor, Neil. 1996. William Shakespeare, "Hamlet" . Plymouth, UK: Northcote House. ISBN 0-7463-0765-9 . Thomson, Peter. 1983. Shakespeare's Theatre . Theatre Production ser. London and Boston: Routledge and Kegan Paul. ISBN 0-7100-9480-9 . Uglow, Jenny. 1977. Hogarth: A Life and a World . New ed. London: Faber and Faber, 2002. ISBN 0-571-19376-5 . Vickers, Brian, ed. 1974a. Shakespeare: The Critical Heritage . Volume one (1623–1692). New ed. London: Routledge, 1995. ISBN 0-415-13404-8 . ———. 1974b. Shakespeare: The Critical Heritage . Volume four (1753–1765). New ed. London: Routledge, 1995. ISBN 0-415-13407-2 . ———. 1974c. Shakespeare: The Critical Heritage . Volume five (1765–1774). New ed. London: Routledge, 1995. ISBN 0-415-13408-0 . Vogler, Christopher. 1992. The Writer's Journey: Mythic Structure for Storytellers and Screenwriters . Second revised ed. London: Pan Books, 1999. ISBN 0-330-37591-1 . Ward, David. 1992. "The King and 'Hamlet' ". Shakespeare Quarterly 43.3: 280–302. Weimann, Robert. 1985. "Mimesis in Hamlet ". In Shakespeare and the Question of Theory : 275–291. Ed. Patricia Parker and Geoffrey Hartman. New York and London: Methuen. ISBN 0-416-36930-8 . Wells, Stanley , and Stanton, Sarah, eds. 2002. The Cambridge Companion to Shakespeare on Stage . Cambridge Companions to Literature ser. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-79711-X . Wilson, John Dover . 1932. The Essential Shakespeare: A Biographical Adventure . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ———. 1934. The Manuscript of Shakespeare's "Hamlet" and the Problems of its Transmission: An Essay in Critical Bibliography . 2 volumes. Cambridge: The University Press. ———. 1935. What Happens in Hamlet . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1959. ISBN 0-521-06835-5 . Welsh, Alexander. 2001. Hamlet in his Modern Guises (New Jersey: Princeton) in Thompson and Taylor (2006a, 125). Winstanley, Lilian. 1921. Hamlet and the Scottish succession, Being an Examination of the Relations of the Play of Hamlet to the Scottish Succession and the Essex Conspiracy . London: Cambridge University Press. Reprinted Philadelphia: R. West, 1977. ISBN 0-8492-2912-X . Wofford, Susanne L. 1994. "A Critical History of Hamlet". In Hamlet: Complete, Authoritative Text with Biographical and Historical Contexts, Critical History, and Essays from Five Contemporary Critical Perspectives : 181–207. Boston: Bedford Books of St. Martins Press. ISBN 0-312-08986-4 . Library resources about Hamlet Resources in your library Resources in other libraries External links [ edit ] Listen to this article ( info/dl ) Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player. You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser. This audio file was created from a revision of the " Hamlet " article dated 2011-10-14, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. ( Audio help ) More spoken articles Hamlet at the Internet Broadway Database Hamlet at the Internet off-Broadway Database Hamlet , The Royal Shakespeare Company 2010 Complete video on PBS.org (not available outside the US). Hamlet public domain audiobook at LibriVox Texts "HyperHamlet" — The Q2 text, with copious hyper-linked references and notes. Run by the University of Basel. ISE — Internet Shakespeare Editions: transcripts and facsimiles of Q1, Q2 and F1. Shakespeare Quartos Archive — Transcriptions and facsimiles of thirty-two copies of the five pre-1642 quarto editions. Open Source Shakespeare— Hamlet A complete text of Hamlet based on Q2. View all of Hamlet's lines in Open Source Shakespeare. Oxford Edition (1914) Project Gutenberg full text Analysis Hamlet Guide – scholarly research site, includes photographs and academic analysis. Hamlet on the Ramparts — The MIT 's Shakespeare Electronic Archive. Hamletworks.org – scholarly resource with multiple versions of Hamlet , commentaries, concordances, and more. Depictions and commentary of Hamlet paintings Clear Shakespeare Hamlet — A word-by-word audio guide through the play. v t e William Shakespeare Plays Tragedies Antony and Cleopatra Coriolanus Hamlet Julius Caesar King Lear Macbeth Othello Romeo and Juliet Sir Thomas More * Timon of Athens Titus Andronicus Troilus and Cressida Comedies All's Well That Ends Well As You Like It The Comedy of Errors Cymbeline Love's Labour's Lost Measure for Measure The Merchant of Venice The Merry Wives of Windsor A Midsummer Night's Dream Much Ado About Nothing Pericles, Prince of Tyre * The Taming of the Shrew The Tempest Twelfth Night The Two Gentlemen of Verona The Two Noble Kinsmen * The Winter's Tale Cardenio * Love's Labour's Won Histories King John Edward III * Richard II 1 Henry IV 2 Henry IV Henry V 1 Henry VI 2 Henry VI 3 Henry VI Richard III Henry VIII * See also Problem plays Late romances Characters A–K L–Z Chronology Performances Quarto publications First Folio Second Folio Poems Shakespeare's sonnets comparison Venus and Adonis The Rape of Lucrece The Phoenix and the Turtle The Passionate Pilgrim * A Lover's Complaint Life and works Birthplace and childhood home Apocrypha Bibliography Complete Works of William Shakespeare Translations Early editions Editors English Renaissance theatre Family Globe Theatre Handwriting Lord Chamberlain's Men / King's Men The Theatre Curtain Theatre New Place home Portraits Religious views Sexuality Spelling of his name Stratford-upon-Avon Style Legacy Attribution studies Authorship question Influence Memorials Screen adaptations Shakespeare Birthplace Trust Folger Shakespeare Library Shakespeare Quarterly Shakespeare's Globe (replica) Bardolatry Titles of works taken from Shakespeare * Shakespeare and other authors Lost v t e William Shakespeare 's Hamlet Characters Hamlet Claudius Gertrude Ghost Polonius Laertes Ophelia Horatio Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Fortinbras The Gravediggers Yorick Soliloquies " To be, or not to be " " Mortal coil " " What a piece of work is a man " " Speak the speech " Words and phrases " The lady doth protest too much, methinks " " Thy name is " " Primrose path " Terminology Dumbshow Induction Quiddity Substitution Sources Criticism Legend of Hamlet The Spanish Tragedy Ur-Hamlet Critical approaches Bibliographies Horwendill Saxo Grammaticus House of Gonzaga Damon and Pythias Influence Common phrases from Hamlet Hamlet in popular culture References to Ophelia Language of flowers Human skull symbolism Performances Moscow Art Theatre (1911–1912) Richard Burton (1964) On screen 1900 1907 1908 1912 1913 1917 1921 1935 1948 1954 1961 1964 1969 1974 1990 1996 2000 Adaptations Films The Rest Is Silence (1959) The Bad Sleep Well (1960) Ophelia (1963) Johnny Hamlet (1968) One Hamlet Less (1973) Acting Hamlet in the Village of Mrdusa Donja (1974) The Angel of Vengeance – The Female Hamlet (1977) Strange Brew (1983) Hamlet Goes Business (1987) The Lion King (1994) Let the Devil Wear Black (1999) Dating Hamlet (2002) The Banquet (2006) Karmayogi (2012) Haider (2014) Hamlet A.D.D. (2014) Novels Gertrude and Claudius (2000) Ophelia's Revenge (2003) The Dead Fathers Club (2006) Something Rotten (2007) Hamlet's Father (2008) The Story of Edgar Sawtelle (2008) Plays Hamletmachine (1977) Dogg's Hamlet (1979) Fortinbras (1991) Hamlet (2005) Musicals Rockabye Hamlet (1973) The Lion King (1997) Television Hamlet at Elsinore (1964) Hamlet, Prince of Denmark (1980) Hamlet (1992) Sons of Anarchy (2008) Hamlet (2009) Parody 15-Minute Hamlet The Complete Works of William Shakespeare (Abridged) Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Io, Amleto The Klingon Hamlet " Lyle the Kindly Viking " To Be or Not to Be: That is the Adventure Songs " My Robin is to the Greenwood Gone " (16th century) " Pull Me Under " (1992) " Song for Athene " (1997) Opera/Classical Hamlet (Thomas) Amleto (Faccio) Hamlet (Tchaikovsky) Tristia (Berlioz) Die Hamletmaschine (Rihm) Story within a story Films To Be or Not to Be (1942) To Be or Not to Be (1983) Rosencrantz & Guildenstern Are Dead (1990) Renaissance Man (1994) In the Bleak Midwinter (1995) Hamlet 2 (2008) Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Undead (2009) Three Days (2012) Plays Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead (1966) Stage Blood (1974) I Hate Hamlet (1991) To Be or Not to Be (2008) Novels Hamlet, Revenge! (1937) Theatre of War (1994) " The Undiscovered " (1997) The Shakespeare Stealer (1998) Interred with Their Bones (2007) Television " The Producer " (1966) Slings & Arrows (2003) Art Ophelia Affe mit Schädel Video game Last Action Hero (1993) Hamlet (2010) Intertextuality Asterix and the Great Crossing The Seagull Sharpe's Havoc Related Hamlet and Oedipus Hamlet Had an Uncle Hamlet and His Problems Hebenon Hamlet Q1 Ostalo je ćutanje The Chronicles of Amber " Symphony No. 65 " (Haydn) War Highlander II: The Quickening The Hobart Shakespeareans Gertrude – The Cry Poor Murderer Something Rotten! " The Conscience of the King " " Born to Be King " v t e Laurence Olivier Award for Best Revival (2001–2025) Twelfth Night / Uncle Vanya (2003) Mourning Becomes Electra (2004) Hamlet (2005) Hedda Gabler (2006) The Crucible (2007) Saint Joan (2008) The Histories (2009) Cat on a Hot Tin Roof (2010) After the Dance (2011) Anna Christie (2012) Long Day's Journey into Night (2013) Ghosts (2014) A View from the Bridge (2015) Complete list ( 1991–2000 ) ( 2001–2025 ) Portals Access related topics Shakespeare portal Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Authority control WorldCat VIAF : 176993890 LCCN : n80008522 GND : 4099350-4 SUDOC : 027294773 BNF : cb11936813g (data)
