Religion, mysticism and mythology

/wiki/Intelligent_design
Intelligent design
This article is about a form of creationism.  For generic arguments from "intelligent design", see Teleological argument .  For the movement, see Intelligent design movement .  For other uses of the phrase, see Intelligent design (disambiguation) . Part of a series on Intelligent design Watchmaker analogy Concepts Irreducible complexity Specified complexity Fine-tuned universe Intelligent designer Theistic science Neo-creationism Movement Timeline Wedge strategy Politics Kitzmiller v. Dover Campaigns Discovery Institute campaigns "Teach the Controversy" Organisations Discovery Institute Center for Science and Culture Centre for Intelligent Design International Society for Complexity, Information, and Design (ISCID) Intelligent Design and Evolution Awareness Center Physicians and Surgeons for Scientific Integrity Truth in Science Reactions Jewish Roman Catholic Scientific bodies that explicitly reject Intelligent design Creationism Book Category Creationism portal v t e Intelligent design ( ID ) is the pseudoscientific view [ 1 ] [ 2 ] that "certain features of the universe and of living things are best explained by an intelligent cause, not an undirected process such as natural selection ." [ 3 ] Educators, philosophers, and the scientific community have demonstrated that ID is a religious argument, a form of creationism which lacks empirical support and offers no testable or tenable hypotheses . [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Proponents argue that it is "an evidence-based scientific theory about life's origins" that challenges the methodological naturalism inherent in modern science, [ 7 ] [ 8 ] while conceding that they have yet to produce a scientific theory . [ 9 ] The leading proponents of ID are associated with the Discovery Institute , a politically conservative think tank based in the United States . [ n 1 ] Although they state that ID is not creationism and deliberately avoid assigning a personality to the designer, many of these proponents express belief that the designer is the Christian deity. [ n 2 ] ID presents negative arguments against evolutionary explanations, and its positive argument is an analogy between natural systems and human artifacts , [ 10 ] a version of the theological argument from design for the existence of God . [ n 3 ] Both irreducible complexity and specified complexity present detailed negative assertions that certain features (biological and informational, respectively) are too complex to be the result of natural processes. Proponents then conclude by analogy that these features are evidence of design. [ 10 ] [ n 4 ] Detailed scientific examination has rebutted the claims that evolutionary explanations are inadequate, and this premise of intelligent design—that evidence against evolution constitutes evidence for design—has been criticized as a false dichotomy . [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Though the phrase "intelligent design" had featured previously in theological discussions of the design argument, [ 13 ] the first publication of the term intelligent design in its present use as an alternative term for creationism was in Of Pandas and People , [ 14 ] [ 15 ] a 1989 textbook intended for high school biology classes. The term was substituted into drafts of the book after the 1987 United States Supreme Court 's Edwards v. Aguillard decision, which barred the teaching of creation science in public schools on constitutional grounds . [ 16 ] From the mid-1990s, the intelligent design movement (IDM), supported by the Discovery Institute, [ 17 ] advocated inclusion of intelligent design in public school biology curricula. [ 4 ] This led to the 2005 Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District trial in which U.S. District Judge John E. Jones III ruled that intelligent design is not science, that it "cannot uncouple itself from its creationist, and thus religious, antecedents," and that the school district's promotion of it therefore violated the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution , [ 18 ] often described as the "wall of separation between church and state" . Contents 1 History 1.1 Origin of the concept 1.2 Origin of the term 1.2.1 Of Pandas and People 2 Concepts 2.1 Irreducible complexity 2.2 Specified complexity 2.3 Fine-tuned Universe 2.4 Intelligent designer 3 Movement 3.1 Religion and leading proponents 3.2 Reaction from other creationist groups 3.3 Reaction from the scientific community 3.4 Polls 3.5 Allegations of discrimination against ID proponents 4 Criticism 4.1 Scientific criticism 4.2 Arguments from ignorance 4.3 Possible theological implications 4.4 God of the gaps 5 Kitzmiller trial 5.1 Reaction 6 Status outside the United States 6.1 Europe 6.2 Relation to Islam 6.3 Relation to ISKCON 6.4 Australia 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading History Origin of the concept See also: Creation science , Teleological argument and Watchmaker analogy By 1910 evolution was not a topic of major religious controversy in America, but in the 1920s the Fundamentalist–Modernist Controversy in theology resulted in Fundamentalist Christian opposition to teaching evolution, and the origins of modern creationism. [ 19 ] Teaching of evolution was effectively suspended in U.S. public schools until the 1960s, and when evolution was then reintroduced into the curriculum, there was a series of court cases in which attempts were made to get creationism taught alongside evolution in science classes. Young Earth creationists (YEC) promoted creation science as "an alternative scientific explanation of the world in which we live." This frequently invoked the argument from design to explain complexity in nature as demonstrating the existence of God. [ 10 ] The argument from design, the teleological argument or "argument from intelligent design," has been advanced in theology for centuries. [ 20 ] It can be summarised briefly as "Wherever complex design exists, there must have been a designer; nature is complex; therefore nature must have had an intelligent designer." [ n 3 ] Thomas Aquinas presented it in his fifth proof of God's existence as a syllogism . In 1802, William Paley 's Natural Theology presented examples of intricate purpose in organisms. His version of the watchmaker analogy argued that, in the same way that a watch has evidently been designed by a craftsman, complexity and adaptation seen in nature must have been designed, and the perfection and diversity of these designs shows the designer to be omnipotent, the Christian God . [ 21 ] Like creation science, intelligent design centers on Paley's religious argument from design, [ 10 ] but while Paley's natural theology was open to deistic design through God-given laws, intelligent design seeks scientific confirmation of repeated miraculous interventions in the history of life. [ 19 ] Creation science prefigured the intelligent design arguments of irreducible complexity, even featuring the bacterial flagellum . In the United States, attempts to introduce creation science in schools led to court rulings that it is religious in nature, and thus cannot be taught in public school science classrooms. Intelligent design is also presented as science, and shares other arguments with creation science but avoids literal Biblical references to such things as the Flood story from the Book of Genesis or using Bible verses to age the Earth . [ 10 ] Barbara Forrest writes that the intelligent design movement began in 1984 with the book The Mystery of Life's Origin: Reassessing Current Theories , co-written by creationist Charles B. Thaxton , a chemist, with two other authors, and published by Jon A. Buell's Foundation for Thought and Ethics . Thaxton held a conference in 1988, "Sources of Information Content in DNA," which attracted creationists such as Stephen C. Meyer . [ 22 ] In March 1986, a review by Meyer used information theory to suggest that messages transmitted by DNA in the cell show "specified complexity" specified by intelligence, and must have originated with an intelligent agent. [ 23 ] In November of that year, Thaxton described his reasoning as a more sophisticated form of Paley's argument from design. [ 24 ] At the "Sources of Information Content in DNA" conference in 1988, he said that his intelligent cause view was compatible with both metaphysical naturalism and supernaturalism . [ 25 ] Intelligent design avoids identifying or naming the intelligent designer —it merely states that one (or more) must exist—but leaders of the movement have said the designer is the Christian God. [ 26 ] [ n 5 ] [ n 6 ] Whether this lack of specificity about the designer's identity in public discussions is a genuine feature of the concept, or just a posture taken to avoid alienating those who would separate religion from the teaching of science, has been a matter of great debate between supporters and critics of intelligent design. The Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District court ruling held the latter to be the case. Origin of the term See also: Timeline of intelligent design Since the Middle Ages , discussion of the religious "argument from design" or " teleological argument " in theology , with its concept of "intelligent design," has persistently referred to the theistic Creator God. Although ID proponents chose this provocative label for their proposed alternative to evolutionary explanations, they have de-emphasized their religious antecedents and denied that ID is natural theology , while still presenting ID as supporting the argument for the existence of God. [ 13 ] [ 27 ] While intelligent design proponents have pointed out past examples of the phrase intelligent design which they said were not creationist and faith-based, they have failed to show that these usages had any influence on those who introduced the label in the intelligent design movement. [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] Variations on the phrase appeared in YEC publications: a 1967 book co-written by Percival Davis referred to "design according to which basic organisms were created." In 1970, A. E. Wilder-Smith published The Creation of Life: A Cybernetic Approach to Evolution which defended Paley's design argument with computer calculations of the improbability of genetic sequences, which he said could not be explained by evolution but required "the abhorred necessity of divine intelligent activity behind nature," and that "the same problem would be expected to beset the relationship between the designer behind nature and the intelligently designed part of nature known as man." In a 1984 article as well as in his affidavit to Edwards v. Aguillard , Dean H. Kenyon defended creation science by stating that "biomolecular systems require intelligent design and engineering know-how," citing Wilder-Smith. Creationist Richard B. Bliss used the phrase "creative design" in Origins: Two Models: Evolution, Creation (1976), and in Origins: Creation or Evolution (1988) wrote that "while evolutionists are trying to find non-intelligent ways for life to occur, the creationist insists that an intelligent design must have been there in the first place." [ 30 ] [ 31 ] The first systematic use of the term, defined in a glossary and claimed to be other than creationism, was in Of Pandas and People , co-authored by Davis and Kenyon. [ 28 ] Of Pandas and People Main article: Of Pandas and People Use of the terms "creationism" versus "intelligent design" in sequential drafts of the book Of Pandas and People . [ 14 ] The most common modern use of the words "intelligent design" as a term intended to describe a field of inquiry began after the United States Supreme Court ruled in 1987 in the case of Edwards v. Aguillard that creationism is unconstitutional in public school science curricula. [ 14 ] A Discovery Institute report says that Charles B. Thaxton, editor of Pandas , had picked the phrase up from a NASA scientist, and thought "That's just what I need, it's a good engineering term." [ 32 ] In drafts of the book, over one hundred uses of the root word "creation," such as "creationism" and "Creation Science," were changed, almost without exception, to "intelligent design," [ 15 ] while "creationists" was changed to "design proponents" or, in one instance, " cdesign proponentsists " [ sic ]. [ 14 ] In June 1988, Thaxton held a conference titled "Sources of Information Content in DNA" in Tacoma , Washington , [ 25 ] and in December decided to use the label "intelligent design" for his new creationist movement. [ 22 ] Stephen C. Meyer was at the conference, and later recalled that "The term intelligent design came up..." [ 33 ] Of Pandas and People was published in 1989, and in addition to including all the current arguments for ID, was the first book to make systematic use of the terms "intelligent design" and "design proponents" as well as the phrase "design theory," defining the term intelligent design in a glossary and representing it as not being creationism. It thus represents the start of the modern intelligent design movement . [ 14 ] [ 28 ] [ 34 ] "Intelligent design" was the most prominent of around fifteen new terms it introduced as a new lexicon of creationist terminology to oppose evolution without using religious language. [ 35 ] It was the first place where the phrase "intelligent design" appeared in its primary present use, as stated both by its publisher Jon A. Buell, [ 10 ] [ 36 ] and by William A. Dembski in his expert witness report for Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District . [ 37 ] The National Center for Science Education (NCSE) has criticized the book for presenting all of the basic arguments of intelligent design proponents and being actively promoted for use in public schools before any research had been done to support these arguments. [ 34 ] Although presented as a scientific textbook, philosopher of science Michael Ruse considers the contents "worthless and dishonest." [ 38 ] An American Civil Liberties Union lawyer described it as a political tool aimed at students who did not "know science or understand the controversy over evolution and creationism." One of the authors of the science framework used by California schools, Kevin Padian , condemned it for its "sub-text," "intolerance for honest science" and "incompetence." [ 39 ] Concepts Irreducible complexity Main article: Irreducible complexity The concept of irreducible complexity was popularised by Michael Behe in his 1996 book, Darwin's Black Box . The term "irreducible complexity" was introduced by biochemist Michael Behe in his 1996 book Darwin's Black Box , though he had already described the concept in his contributions to the 1993 revised edition of Of Pandas and People . [ 34 ] Behe defines it as "a single system which is composed of several well-matched interacting parts that contribute to the basic function, wherein the removal of any one of the parts causes the system to effectively cease functioning." [ 40 ] Behe uses the analogy of a mousetrap to illustrate this concept. A mousetrap consists of several interacting pieces—the base, the catch, the spring and the hammer—all of which must be in place for the mousetrap to work. Removal of any one piece destroys the function of the mousetrap. Intelligent design advocates assert that natural selection could not create irreducibly complex systems, because the selectable function is present only when all parts are assembled. Behe argued that irreducibly complex biological mechanisms include the bacterial flagellum of E. coli , the blood clotting cascade , cilia , and the adaptive immune system . [ 41 ] [ 42 ] Critics point out that the irreducible complexity argument assumes that the necessary parts of a system have always been necessary and therefore could not have been added sequentially. [ 12 ] They argue that something that is at first merely advantageous can later become necessary as other components change. Furthermore, they argue, evolution often proceeds by altering preexisting parts or by removing them from a system, rather than by adding them. This is sometimes called the "scaffolding objection" by an analogy with scaffolding, which can support an "irreducibly complex" building until it is complete and able to stand on its own. [ n 7 ] Behe has acknowledged using "sloppy prose," and that his "argument against Darwinism does not add up to a logical proof." [ n 8 ] Irreducible complexity has remained a popular argument among advocates of intelligent design; in the Dover trial , the court held that "Professor Behe's claim for irreducible complexity has been refuted in peer-reviewed research papers and has been rejected by the scientific community at large." [ 11 ] Specified complexity Main article: Specified complexity In 1986, Charles B. Thaxton, a physical chemist and creationist, used the term "specified complexity" from information theory when claiming that messages transmitted by DNA in the cell were specified by intelligence, and must have originated with an intelligent agent. [ 23 ] The intelligent design concept of "specified complexity" was developed in the 1990s by mathematician, philosopher, and theologian William A. Dembski. [ 43 ] Dembski states that when something exhibits specified complexity (i.e., is both complex and "specified," simultaneously), one can infer that it was produced by an intelligent cause (i.e., that it was designed) rather than being the result of natural processes. He provides the following examples: "A single letter of the alphabet is specified without being complex. A long sentence of random letters is complex without being specified. A Shakespearean sonnet is both complex and specified." [ 44 ] He states that details of living things can be similarly characterized, especially the "patterns" of molecular sequences in functional biological molecules such as DNA. William A. Dembski proposed the concept of specified complexity . [ 45 ] Dembski defines complex specified information (CSI) as anything with a less than 1 in 10 150 chance of occurring by (natural) chance. Critics say that this renders the argument a tautology : complex specified information cannot occur naturally because Dembski has defined it thus, so the real question becomes whether or not CSI actually exists in nature. [ 46 ] [ n 9 ] [ 47 ] The conceptual soundness of Dembski's specified complexity/CSI argument has been discredited in the scientific and mathematical communities. [ 48 ] [ 49 ] Specified complexity has yet to be shown to have wide applications in other fields, as Dembski asserts. John Wilkins and Wesley R. Elsberry characterize Dembski's "explanatory filter" as eliminative because it eliminates explanations sequentially: first regularity, then chance, finally defaulting to design. They argue that this procedure is flawed as a model for scientific inference because the asymmetric way it treats the different possible explanations renders it prone to making false conclusions. [ 50 ] Richard Dawkins , another critic of intelligent design, argues in The God Delusion (2006) that allowing for an intelligent designer to account for unlikely complexity only postpones the problem, as such a designer would need to be at least as complex. [ 51 ] Other scientists have argued that evolution through selection is better able to explain the observed complexity, as is evident from the use of selective evolution to design certain electronic, aeronautic and automotive systems that are considered problems too complex for human "intelligent designers." [ 52 ] Fine-tuned Universe Main article: Fine-tuned Universe Intelligent design proponents have also occasionally appealed to broader teleological arguments outside of biology, most notably an argument based on the fine-tuning of universal constants that make matter and life possible and which are argued not to be solely attributable to chance. These include the values of fundamental physical constants , the relative strength of nuclear forces , electromagnetism , and gravity between fundamental particles , as well as the ratios of masses of such particles. Intelligent design proponent and Center for Science and Culture fellow Guillermo Gonzalez argues that if any of these values were even slightly different, the universe would be dramatically different, making it impossible for many chemical elements and features of the Universe , such as galaxies , to form. [ 53 ] Thus, proponents argue, an intelligent designer of life was needed to ensure that the requisite features were present to achieve that particular outcome. Scientists have generally responded that these arguments are poorly supported by existing evidence. [ 54 ] [ 55 ] Victor J. Stenger and other critics say both intelligent design and the weak form of the anthropic principle are essentially a tautology ; in his view, these arguments amount to the claim that life is able to exist because the Universe is able to support life. [ 56 ] [ 57 ] [ 58 ] The claim of the improbability of a life-supporting universe has also been criticized as an argument by lack of imagination for assuming no other forms of life are possible. Life as we know it might not exist if things were different, but a different sort of life might exist in its place. A number of critics also suggest that many of the stated variables appear to be interconnected and that calculations made by mathematicians and physicists suggest that the emergence of a universe similar to ours is quite probable. [ 59 ] Intelligent designer Main article: Intelligent designer The contemporary intelligent design movement formulates its arguments in secular terms and intentionally avoids identifying the intelligent agent (or agents) they posit. Although they do not state that God is the designer, the designer is often implicitly hypothesized to have intervened in a way that only a god could intervene. Dembski, in The Design Inference (1998), speculates that an alien culture could fulfill these requirements. Of Pandas and People proposes that SETI illustrates an appeal to intelligent design in science. In 2000, philosopher of science Robert T. Pennock suggested the Raëlian UFO religion as a real-life example of an extraterrestrial intelligent designer view that "make[s] many of the same bad arguments against evolutionary theory as creationists". [ 60 ] The authoritative description of intelligent design, [ n 10 ] however, explicitly states that the Universe displays features of having been designed. Acknowledging the paradox , Dembski concludes that "no intelligent agent who is strictly physical could have presided over the origin of the universe or the origin of life." [ 61 ] The leading proponents have made statements to their supporters that they believe the designer to be the Christian God, to the exclusion of all other religions. [ 26 ] Beyond the debate over whether intelligent design is scientific, a number of critics argue that existing evidence makes the design hypothesis appear unlikely, irrespective of its status in the world of science. For example, Jerry Coyne asks why a designer would "give us a pathway for making vitamin C , but then destroy it by disabling one of its enzymes" (see pseudogene ) and why a designer would not "stock oceanic islands with reptiles, mammals, amphibians, and freshwater fish, despite the suitability of such islands for these species". Coyne also points to the fact that "the flora and fauna on those islands resemble that of the nearest mainland, even when the environments are very different" as evidence that species were not placed there by a designer. [ 62 ] Previously, in Darwin's Black Box , Behe had argued that we are simply incapable of understanding the designer's motives, so such questions cannot be answered definitively. Odd designs could, for example, "...have been placed there by the designer for a reason—for artistic reasons, for variety, to show off, for some as-yet-undetected practical purpose, or for some unguessable reason—or they might not." [ 63 ] Coyne responds that in light of the evidence, "either life resulted not from intelligent design, but from evolution; or the intelligent designer is a cosmic prankster who designed everything to make it look as though it had evolved." [ 62 ] Intelligent design proponents such as Paul Nelson avoid the problem of poor design in nature by insisting that we have simply failed to understand the perfection of the design. Behe cites Paley as his inspiration, but he differs from Paley's expectation of a perfect Creation and proposes that designers do not necessarily produce the best design they can. Behe suggests that, like a parent not wanting to spoil a child with extravagant toys, the designer can have multiple motives for not giving priority to excellence in engineering. He says that "Another problem with the argument from imperfection is that it critically depends on a psychoanalysis of the unidentified designer. Yet the reasons that a designer would or would not do anything are virtually impossible to know unless the designer tells you specifically what those reasons are." [ 63 ] This reliance on inexplicable motives of the designer makes intelligent design scientifically untestable. Retired UC Berkeley law professor, author and intelligent design advocate Phillip E. Johnson puts forward a core definition that the designer creates for a purpose, giving the example that in his view AIDS was created to punish immorality and is not caused by HIV , but such motives cannot be tested by scientific methods. [ 64 ] Asserting the need for a designer of complexity also raises the question "What designed the designer?" [ 65 ] Intelligent design proponents say that the question is irrelevant to or outside the scope of intelligent design. [ n 11 ] Richard Wein counters that "...scientific explanations often create new unanswered questions. But, in assessing the value of an explanation, these questions are not irrelevant. They must be balanced against the improvements in our understanding which the explanation provides. Invoking an unexplained being to explain the origin of other beings (ourselves) is little more than question-begging . The new question raised by the explanation is as problematic as the question which the explanation purports to answer." [ 47 ] Richard Dawkins sees the assertion that the designer does not need to be explained as a thought-terminating cliché . [ 66 ] [ 67 ] In the absence of observable, measurable evidence, the very question "What designed the designer?" leads to an infinite regression from which intelligent design proponents can only escape by resorting to religious creationism or logical contradiction. [ 68 ] Movement Main article: Intelligent design movement The Discovery Institute 's Center for the Renewal of Science and Culture used banners based on " The Creation of Adam " from the Sistine Chapel . Later it used a less religious image, then was renamed the Center for Science and Culture . [ 69 ] The intelligent design movement is a direct outgrowth of the creationism of the 1980s. [ 4 ] The scientific and academic communities, along with a U.S. federal court, view intelligent design as either a form of creationism or as a direct descendant that is closely intertwined with traditional creationism; [ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] and several authors explicitly refer to it as "intelligent design creationism." [ 4 ] [ 76 ] [ n 12 ] [ 77 ] [ 78 ] The movement is headquartered in the Center for Science and Culture, established in 1996 as the creationist wing of the Discovery Institute to promote a religious agenda [ n 13 ] calling for broad social, academic and political changes. The Discovery Institute's intelligent design campaigns have been staged primarily in the United States, although efforts have been made in other countries to promote intelligent design. Leaders of the movement say intelligent design exposes the limitations of scientific orthodoxy and of the secular philosophy of naturalism . Intelligent design proponents allege that science should not be limited to naturalism and should not demand the adoption of a naturalistic philosophy that dismisses out-of-hand any explanation that includes a supernatural cause. The overall goal of the movement is to "reverse the stifling dominance of the materialist worldview " represented by the theory of evolution in favor of "a science consonant with Christian and theistic convictions." [ n 13 ] Phillip E. Johnson stated that the goal of intelligent design is to cast creationism as a scientific concept. [ n 5 ] [ n 14 ] All leading intelligent design proponents are fellows or staff of the Discovery Institute and its Center for Science and Culture. [ 79 ] Nearly all intelligent design concepts and the associated movement are the products of the Discovery Institute, which guides the movement and follows its wedge strategy while conducting its " Teach the Controversy " campaign and their other related programs . Leading intelligent design proponents have made conflicting statements regarding intelligent design. In statements directed at the general public, they say intelligent design is not religious; when addressing conservative Christian supporters, they state that intelligent design has its foundation in the Bible. [ n 14 ] Recognizing the need for support, the Institute affirms its Christian, evangelistic orientation: Alongside a focus on influential opinion-makers, we also seek to build up a popular base of support among our natural constituency, namely, Christians. We will do this primarily through apologetics seminars. We intend these to encourage and equip believers with new scientific evidences that support the faith, as well as to "popularize" our ideas in the broader culture. [ n 13 ] Barbara Forrest, an expert who has written extensively on the movement, describes this as being due to the Discovery Institute's obfuscating its agenda as a matter of policy. She has written that the movement's "activities betray an aggressive, systematic agenda for promoting not only intelligent design creationism, but the religious worldview that undergirds it." [ 80 ] Religion and leading proponents Although arguments for intelligent design by the intelligent design movement are formulated in secular terms and intentionally avoid positing the identity of the designer, [ n 15 ] the majority of principal intelligent design advocates are publicly religious Christians who have stated that, in their view, the designer proposed in intelligent design is the Christian conception of God . Stuart Burgess, Phillip E. Johnson, William A. Dembski, and Stephen C. Meyer are evangelical Protestants ; Michael Behe is a Roman Catholic ; and Jonathan Wells is a member of the Unification Church . Non-Christian proponents include David Klinghoffer , who is Jewish , [ 81 ] Michael Denton and David Berlinski , who are agnostic , [ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] and Muzaffar Iqbal , a Pakistani-Canadian Muslim . [ 85 ] [ 86 ] Phillip E. Johnson has stated that cultivating ambiguity by employing secular language in arguments that are carefully crafted to avoid overtones of theistic creationism is a necessary first step for ultimately reintroducing the Christian concept of God as the designer. Johnson explicitly calls for intelligent design proponents to obfuscate their religious motivations so as to avoid having intelligent design identified "as just another way of packaging the Christian evangelical message." [ n 16 ] Johnson emphasizes that "...the first thing that has to be done is to get the Bible out of the discussion. ...This is not to say that the biblical issues are unimportant; the point is rather that the time to address them will be after we have separated materialist prejudice from scientific fact." [ 87 ] The strategy of deliberately disguising the religious intent of intelligent design has been described by William A. Dembski in The Design Inference . [ 88 ] In this work, Dembski lists a god or an " alien life force " as two possible options for the identity of the designer; however, in his book Intelligent Design: The Bridge Between Science and Theology (1999), Dembski states: Christ is indispensable to any scientific theory, even if its practitioners don't have a clue about him. The pragmatics of a scientific theory can, to be sure, be pursued without recourse to Christ. But the conceptual soundness of the theory can in the end only be located in Christ. [ 89 ] Dembski also stated, "ID is part of God's general revelation [...] Not only does intelligent design rid us of this ideology [ materialism ], which suffocates the human spirit, but, in my personal experience, I've found that it opens the path for people to come to Christ." [ 90 ] Both Johnson and Dembski cite the Bible's Gospel of John as the foundation of intelligent design. [ 26 ] [ n 14 ] Barbara Forrest contends such statements reveal that leading proponents see intelligent design as essentially religious in nature, not merely a scientific concept that has implications with which their personal religious beliefs happen to coincide. [ n 17 ] She writes that the leading proponents of intelligent design are closely allied with the ultra-conservative Christian Reconstructionism movement. She lists connections of (current and former) Discovery Institute Fellows Phillip E. Johnson, Charles B. Thaxton, Michael Behe, Richard Weikart , Jonathan Wells and Francis J. Beckwith to leading Christian Reconstructionist organizations, and the extent of the funding provided the Institute by Howard Ahmanson, Jr. , a leading figure in the Reconstructionist movement. [ 4 ] Reaction from other creationist groups Not all creationist organizations have embraced the intelligent design movement. According to Thomas Dixon, "Religious leaders have come out against ID too. An open letter affirming the compatibility of Christian faith and the teaching of evolution, first produced in response to controversies in Wisconsin in 2004, has now been signed by over ten thousand clergy from different Christian denominations across America. In 2006, the director of the Vatican Observatory , the Jesuit astronomer George Coyne , condemned ID as a kind of 'crude creationism' which reduced God to a mere engineer." [ 91 ] Hugh Ross of Reasons to Believe , a proponent of Old Earth creationism , believes that the efforts of intelligent design proponents to divorce the concept from Biblical Christianity make its hypothesis too vague. In 2002, he wrote: "Winning the argument for design without identifying the designer yields, at best, a sketchy origins model. Such a model makes little if any positive impact on the community of scientists and other scholars. [...] ...the time is right for a direct approach, a single leap into the origins fray. Introducing a biblically based, scientifically verifiable creation model represents such a leap." [ 92 ] Likewise, two of the most prominent YEC organizations in the world have attempted to distinguish their views from those of the intelligent design movement. Henry M. Morris of the Institute for Creation Research (ICR) wrote, in 1999, that ID, "even if well-meaning and effectively articulated, will not work! It has often been tried in the past and has failed, and it will fail today. The reason it won't work is because it is not the Biblical method." According to Morris: "The evidence of intelligent design… must be either followed by or accompanied by a sound presentation of true Biblical creationism if it is to be meaningful and lasting." [ 93 ] In 2002, Carl Wieland , then of Answers in Genesis (AiG), criticized design advocates who, though well-intentioned, "'left the Bible out of it'" and thereby unwittingly aided and abetted the modern rejection of the Bible. Wieland explained that "AiG's major 'strategy' is to boldly, but humbly, call the church back to its Biblical foundations… [so] we neither count ourselves a part of this movement nor campaign against it." [ 94 ] Reaction from the scientific community The unequivocal consensus in the scientific community is that intelligent design is not science and has no place in a science curriculum. [ 5 ] The U.S. National Academy of Sciences has stated that "creationism, intelligent design, and other claims of supernatural intervention in the origin of life or of species are not science because they are not testable by the methods of science ." [ 95 ] The U.S. National Science Teachers Association and the American Association for the Advancement of Science have termed it pseudoscience . [ 71 ] Others in the scientific community have denounced its tactics, accusing the ID movement of manufacturing false attacks against evolution, of engaging in misinformation and misrepresentation about science, and marginalizing those who teach it. [ 96 ] More recently, in September 2012, Bill Nye warned that creationist views threaten science education and innovations in the United States. [ 97 ] [ 98 ] In 2001, the Discovery Institute published advertisements under the heading A Scientific Dissent From Darwinism , with the claim that listed scientists had signed this statement expressing skepticism: We are skeptical of claims for the ability of random mutation and natural selection to account for the complexity of life. Careful examination of the evidence for Darwinian theory should be encouraged. [ 99 ] The ambiguous statement did not exclude other known evolutionary mechanisms, and most signatories were not scientists in relevant fields, but starting in 2004 the Institute claimed the increasing number of signatures indicated mounting doubts about evolution among scientists. [ 100 ] The statement formed a key component of Discovery Institute campaigns to present intelligent design as scientifically valid by claiming that evolution lacks broad scientific support, [ 101 ] [ 102 ] with Institute members continued to cite the list through at least 2011. [ 103 ] As part of a strategy to counter these claims, scientists organised Project Steve which gained more signatories named Steve (or variants) than the Institute's petition, and a counter-petition, A Scientific Support for Darwinism , which quickly gained similar numbers of signatories. Polls Several surveys were conducted prior to the December 2005 decision in Kitzmiller v. Dover School District , which sought to determine the level of support for intelligent design among certain groups. According to a 2005 Harris poll , 10% of adults in the United States viewed human beings as "so complex that they required a powerful force or intelligent being to help create them." [ 104 ] Although Zogby polls commissioned by the Discovery Institute show more support, these polls suffer from considerable flaws, such as having a very low response rate (248 out of 16,000), being conducted on behalf of an organization with an expressed interest in the outcome of the poll, and containing leading questions . [ 105 ] [ 106 ] [ 107 ] A series of Gallup polls in the United States from 1982 through 2014 on "Evolution, Creationism, Intelligent Design" found support for "human beings have developed over millions of years from less advanced formed of life, but God guided the process" of between 31% and 40%, support for "God created human beings in pretty much their present form at one time within the last 10,000 years or so" varied from 40% to 47%, and support for "human beings have developed over millions of years from less advanced forms of life, but God had no part in the process" varied from 9% to 19%. The polls also noted answers to a series of more detailed questions. [ 108 ] Allegations of discrimination against ID proponents Main article: Expelled: No Intelligence Allowed There have been allegations that ID proponents have met discrimination, such as being refused tenure or being harshly criticized on the Internet. In the documentary film Expelled: No Intelligence Allowed , released in 2008, host Ben Stein presents five such cases. The film contends that the mainstream science establishment, in a "scientific conspiracy to keep God out of the nation's laboratories and classrooms," suppresses academics who believe they see evidence of intelligent design in nature or criticize evidence of evolution. [ 109 ] [ 110 ] Investigation into these allegations turned up alternative explanations for perceived persecution. [ n 18 ] The film portrays intelligent design as motivated by science, rather than religion, though it does not give a detailed definition of the phrase or attempt to explain it on a scientific level. Other than briefly addressing issues of irreducible complexity, Expelled examines it as a political issue. [ 111 ] [ 112 ] The scientific theory of evolution is portrayed by the film as contributing to fascism , the Holocaust , communism , atheism , and eugenics . [ 111 ] [ 113 ] Expelled has been used in private screenings to legislators as part of the Discovery Institute intelligent design campaign for Academic Freedom bills . [ 114 ] Review screenings were restricted to churches and Christian groups, and at a special pre-release showing, one of the interviewees, PZ Myers , was refused admission. The American Association for the Advancement of Science describes the film as dishonest and divisive propaganda aimed at introducing religious ideas into public school science classrooms, [ 115 ] and the Anti-Defamation League has denounced the film's allegation that evolutionary theory influenced the Holocaust. [ 116 ] [ 117 ] The film includes interviews with scientists and academics who were misled into taking part by misrepresentation of the topic and title of the film. Skeptic Michael Shermer describes his experience of being repeatedly asked the same question without context as "surreal." [ 118 ] Criticism Scientific criticism Main article: Intelligent design and science Advocates of intelligent design seek to keep God and the Bible out of the discussion, and present intelligent design in the language of science as though it were a scientific hypothesis. [ n 15 ] [ 87 ] For a theory to qualify as scientific, [ n 19 ] [ 119 ] [ n 20 ] it is expected to be: Consistent Parsimonious (sparing in its proposed entities or explanations; see Occam's razor ) Useful (describes and explains observed phenomena, and can be used in a predictive manner) Empirically testable and falsifiable (potentially confirmable or disprovable by experiment or observation) Based on multiple observations (often in the form of controlled, repeated experiments) Correctable and dynamic (modified in the light of observations that do not support it) Progressive (refines previous theories) Provisional or tentative (is open to experimental checking, and does not assert certainty) For any theory, hypothesis or conjecture to be considered scientific, it must meet most, and ideally all, of these criteria. The fewer criteria are met, the less scientific it is; and if it meets only a few or none at all, then it cannot be treated as scientific in any meaningful sense of the word. Typical objections to defining intelligent design as science are that it lacks consistency, [ 120 ] violates the principle of parsimony, [ n 21 ] is not scientifically useful, [ n 22 ] is not falsifiable, [ n 23 ] is not empirically testable, [ n 24 ] and is not correctable, dynamic, progressive or provisional. [ n 25 ] [ n 26 ] [ n 27 ] Intelligent design proponents seek to change this fundamental basis of science [ 121 ] by eliminating "methodological naturalism" from science [ 122 ] and replacing it with what the leader of the intelligent design movement, Phillip E. Johnson, calls " theistic realism ." [ n 28 ] Intelligent design proponents argue that naturalistic explanations fail to explain certain phenomena and that supernatural explanations provide a very simple and intuitive explanation for the origins of life and the universe. [ n 29 ] Many intelligent design followers believe that " scientism " is itself a religion that promotes secularism and materialism in an attempt to erase theism from public life, and they view their work in the promotion of intelligent design as a way to return religion to a central role in education and other public spheres. The failure to follow the procedures of scientific discourse and the failure to submit work to the scientific community that withstands scrutiny have weighed against intelligent design being accepted as valid science. [ 123 ] The intelligent design movement has not published a properly peer-reviewed article supporting ID in a scientific journal, and has failed to publish supporting peer-reviewed research or data. [ 123 ] The only article published in a peer-reviewed scientific journal that made a case for intelligent design was quickly withdrawn by the publisher for having circumvented the journal's peer-review standards. [ 124 ] The Discovery Institute says that a number of intelligent design articles have been published in peer-reviewed journals, [ 125 ] but critics, largely members of the scientific community, reject this claim and state intelligent design proponents have set up their own journals with peer review that lack impartiality and rigor, [ n 30 ] consisting entirely of intelligent design supporters. [ n 31 ] Further criticism stems from the fact that the phrase intelligent design makes use of an assumption of the quality of an observable intelligence, a concept that has no scientific consensus definition. The characteristics of intelligence are assumed by intelligent design proponents to be observable without specifying what the criteria for the measurement of intelligence should be. Critics say that the design detection methods proposed by intelligent design proponents are radically different from conventional design detection, undermining the key elements that make it possible as legitimate science. Intelligent design proponents, they say, are proposing both searching for a designer without knowing anything about that designer's abilities, parameters, or intentions (which scientists do know when searching for the results of human intelligence), as well as denying the very distinction between natural/artificial design that allows scientists to compare complex designed artifacts against the background of the sorts of complexity found in nature. [ n 32 ] Among a significant proportion of the general public in the United States, the major concern is whether conventional evolutionary biology is compatible with belief in God and in the Bible, and how this issue is taught in schools. [ 43 ] The Discovery Institute's "Teach the Controversy" campaign promotes intelligent design while attempting to discredit evolution in United States public high school science courses. [ 4 ] [ 126 ] [ 127 ] [ 128 ] [ 129 ] [ 130 ] The scientific community and science education organizations have replied that there is no scientific controversy regarding the validity of evolution and that the controversy exists solely in terms of religion and politics. [ 131 ] [ 132 ] Arguments from ignorance Eugenie C. Scott , along with Glenn Branch and other critics, has argued that many points raised by intelligent design proponents are arguments from ignorance . In the argument from ignorance, a lack of evidence for one view is erroneously argued to constitute proof of the correctness of another view. Scott and Branch say that intelligent design is an argument from ignorance because it relies on a lack of knowledge for its conclusion: lacking a natural explanation for certain specific aspects of evolution, we assume intelligent cause. They contend most scientists would reply that the unexplained is not unexplainable, and that "we don't know yet" is a more appropriate response than invoking a cause outside science. Particularly, Michael Behe's demands for ever more detailed explanations of the historical evolution of molecular systems seem to assume a false dichotomy, where either evolution or design is the proper explanation, and any perceived failure of evolution becomes a victory for design. Scott and Branch also contend that the supposedly novel contributions proposed by intelligent design proponents have not served as the basis for any productive scientific research. [ 133 ] In his conclusion to the Kitzmiller trial, Judge John E. Jones III wrote that "ID is at bottom premised upon a false dichotomy, namely, that to the extent evolutionary theory is discredited, ID is confirmed." This same argument had been put forward to support creation science at the McLean v. Arkansas (1982) trial which found it was "contrived dualism," the false premise of a "two model approach." Behe's argument of irreducible complexity puts forward negative arguments against evolution but does not make any positive scientific case for intelligent design. It fails to allow for scientific explanations continuing to be found, as has been the case with several examples previously put forward as supposed cases of irreducible complexity. [ 134 ] Possible theological implications Intelligent design proponents often insist that their claims do not require a religious component. [ 135 ] However, various philosophical and theological issues are naturally raised by the claims of intelligent design. [ 136 ] Intelligent design proponents attempt to demonstrate scientifically that features such as irreducible complexity and specified complexity could not arise through natural processes, and therefore required repeated direct miraculous interventions by a Designer (often a Christian concept of God). They reject the possibility of a Designer who works merely through setting natural laws in motion at the outset, [ 19 ] in contrast to theistic evolution (to which even Charles Darwin was open [ 137 ] ). Intelligent design is distinct because it asserts repeated miraculous interventions in addition to designed laws. This contrasts with other major religious traditions of a created world in which God's interactions and influences do not work in the same way as physical causes. The Roman Catholic tradition makes a careful distinction between ultimate metaphysical explanations and secondary, natural causes. [ 13 ] The concept of direct miraculous intervention raises other potential theological implications. If such a Designer does not intervene to alleviate suffering even though capable of intervening for other reasons, some imply the designer is not omnibenevolent (see problem of evil and related theodicy ). [ 138 ] Further, repeated interventions imply that the original design was not perfect and final, and thus pose a problem for any who believe that the Creator's work had been both perfect and final. [ 19 ] Intelligent design proponents seek to explain the problem of poor design in nature by insisting that we have simply failed to understand the perfection of the design (for example, proposing that vestigial organs have unknown purposes), or by proposing that designers do not necessarily produce the best design they can, and may have unknowable motives for their actions. [ 64 ] God of the gaps Intelligent design has also been characterized as a God-of-the-gaps argument, [ 139 ] which has the following form: There is a gap in scientific knowledge. The gap is filled with acts of God (or intelligent designer) and therefore proves the existence of God (or intelligent designer). [ 139 ] A God-of-the-gaps argument is the theological version of an argument from ignorance. A key feature of this type of argument is that it merely answers outstanding questions with explanations (often supernatural) that are unverifiable and ultimately themselves subject to unanswerable questions. [ 140 ] Historians of science observe that the astronomy of the earliest civilizations , although astonishing and incorporating mathematical constructions far in excess of any practical value, proved to be misdirected and of little importance to the development of science because they failed to inquire more carefully into the mechanisms that drove the heavenly bodies across the sky. [ 141 ] It was the Greek civilization that first practiced science, although not yet a mathematically oriented experimental science, but nevertheless an attempt to rationalize the world of natural experience without recourse to divine intervention. [ 142 ] In this historically motivated definition of science any appeal to an intelligent creator is explicitly excluded for the paralysing effect it may have on the scientific progress . Kitzmiller trial Main article: Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District was the first direct challenge brought in the United States federal courts against a public school district that required the presentation of intelligent design as an alternative to evolution. The plaintiffs successfully argued that intelligent design is a form of creationism, and that the school board policy thus violated the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. [ 143 ] Eleven parents of students in Dover, Pennsylvania , sued the Dover Area School District over a statement that the school board required be read aloud in ninth-grade science classes when evolution was taught. The plaintiffs were represented by the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), Americans United for Separation of Church and State (AU) and Pepper Hamilton LLP . The National Center for Science Education acted as consultants for the plaintiffs. The defendants were represented by the Thomas More Law Center . [ 144 ] The suit was tried in a bench trial from September 26 to November 4, 2005, before Judge John E. Jones III . Kenneth R. Miller , Kevin Padian, Brian Alters , Robert T. Pennock , Barbara Forrest and John F. Haught served as expert witnesses for the plaintiffs. Michael Behe, Steve Fuller and Scott Minnich served as expert witnesses for the defense. On December 20, 2005, Judge Jones issued his 139-page findings of fact and decision, ruling that the Dover mandate was unconstitutional, and barring intelligent design from being taught in Pennsylvania's Middle District public school science classrooms. The eight Dover school board members who voted for the intelligent design requirement were all defeated in a November 8, 2005, election by challengers who opposed the teaching of intelligent design in a science class, and the current school board president stated that the board does not intend to appeal the ruling. [ 145 ] In his finding of facts, Judge Jones made the following condemnation of the "Teach the Controversy" strategy: ...Moreover, ID's backers have sought to avoid the scientific scrutiny which we have now determined that it cannot withstand by advocating that the controversy , but not ID itself, should be taught in science class. This tactic is at best disingenuous, and at worst a canard . The goal of the IDM is not to encourage critical thought, but to foment a revolution which would supplant evolutionary theory with ID. [ 146 ] Reaction Judge Jones himself anticipated that his ruling would be criticized, saying in his decision that: ...Those who disagree with our holding will likely mark it as the product of an activist judge. If so, they will have erred as this is manifestly not an activist Court. Rather, this case came to us as the result of the activism of an ill-informed faction on a school board, aided by a national public interest law firm eager to find a constitutional test case on ID, who in combination drove the Board to adopt an imprudent and ultimately unconstitutional policy. The breathtaking inanity of the Board's decision is evident when considered against the factual backdrop which has now been fully revealed through this trial. The students, parents, and teachers of the Dover Area School District deserved better than to be dragged into this legal maelstrom, with its resulting utter waste of monetary and personal resources. ... [ 147 ] As Jones had predicted, John G. West , Associate Director of the Center for Science and Culture, said: The Dover decision is an attempt by an activist federal judge to stop the spread of a scientific idea and even to prevent criticism of Darwinian evolution through government-imposed censorship rather than open debate, and it won't work. He has conflated Discovery Institute's position with that of the Dover school board, and he totally misrepresents intelligent design and the motivations of the scientists who research it. [ 148 ] Newspapers have noted with interest that the judge is "a Republican and a churchgoer." [ 149 ] [ 150 ] [ 151 ] Subsequently, the decision has been examined in a search for flaws and conclusions, partly by intelligent design supporters aiming to avoid future defeats in court. In the Winter of 2007, the Montana Law Review published three articles. [ 152 ] In the first, David K. DeWolf, John G. West and Casey Luskin, all of the Discovery Institute, argued that intelligent design is a valid scientific theory, the Jones court should not have addressed the question of whether it was a scientific theory, and that the Kitzmiller decision will have no effect at all on the development and adoption of intelligent design as an alternative to standard evolutionary theory. [ 153 ] In the second Peter H. Irons responded, arguing that the decision was extremely well reasoned and spells the death knell for the intelligent design efforts to introduce creationism in public schools, [ 154 ] while in the third, DeWolf, et al. , answer the points made by Irons. [ 155 ] However, fear of a similar lawsuit has resulted in other school boards abandoning intelligent design "teach the controversy" proposals. [ 4 ] In April 2010, the American Academy of Religion issued Guidelines for Teaching About Religion in K‐12 Public Schools in the United States , which included guidance that creation science or intelligent design should not be taught in science classes, as "Creation science and intelligent design represent worldviews that fall outside of the realm of science that is defined as (and limited to) a method of inquiry based on gathering observable and measurable evidence subject to specific principles of reasoning." However, these worldviews as well as others "that focus on speculation regarding the origins of life represent another important and relevant form of human inquiry that is appropriately studied in literature or social sciences courses. Such study, however, must include a diversity of worldviews representing a variety of religious and philosophical perspectives and must avoid privileging one view as more legitimate than others." [ 156 ] Status outside the United States Europe In June 2007, the Council of Europe 's Committee on Culture, Science and Education issued a report, The dangers of creationism in education , which states "Creationism in any of its forms, such as 'intelligent design', is not based on facts, does not use any scientific reasoning and its contents are pathetically inadequate for science classes." [ 157 ] In describing the dangers posed to education by teaching creationism, it described intelligent design as "anti-science" and involving "blatant scientific fraud" and "intellectual deception" that "blurs the nature, objectives and limits of science" and links it and other forms of creationism to denialism . On October 4, 2007, the Council of Europe's Parliamentary Assembly approved a resolution stating that schools should "resist presentation of creationist ideas in any discipline other than religion," including "intelligent design," which it described as "the latest, more refined version of creationism," "presented in a more subtle way." The resolution emphasises that the aim of the report is not to question or to fight a belief, but to "warn against certain tendencies to pass off a belief as science." [ 158 ] In the United Kingdom , public education includes religious education as a compulsory subject, and there are many faith schools that teach the ethos of particular denominations. When it was revealed that a group called Truth in Science had distributed DVDs produced by Illustra Media [ n 33 ] featuring Discovery Institute fellows making the case for design in nature, [ 159 ] and claimed they were being used by 59 schools, [ 160 ] the Department for Education and Skills (DfES) stated that "Neither creationism nor intelligent design are taught as a subject in schools, and are not specified in the science curriculum" (part of the National Curriculum , which does not apply to independent schools or to education in Scotland ). [ 161 ] [ 162 ] The DfES subsequently stated that "Intelligent design is not a recognised scientific theory; therefore, it is not included in the science curriculum," but left the way open for it to be explored in religious education in relation to different beliefs, as part of a syllabus set by a local Standing Advisory Council on Religious Education . [ 163 ] In 2006, the Qualifications and Curriculum Authority produced a "Religious Education" model unit in which pupils can learn about religious and nonreligious views about creationism, intelligent design and evolution by natural selection. [ 164 ] [ 165 ] On June 25, 2007, the UK Government responded to an e-petition by saying that creationism and intelligent design should not be taught as science, though teachers would be expected to answer pupils' questions within the standard framework of established scientific theories. [ 166 ] Detailed government "Creationism teaching guidance" for schools in England was published on September 18, 2007. It states that "Intelligent design lies wholly outside of science," has no underpinning scientific principles, or explanations, and is not accepted by the science community as a whole. Though it should not be taught as science, "Any questions about creationism and intelligent design which arise in science lessons, for example as a result of media coverage, could provide the opportunity to explain or explore why they are not considered to be scientific theories and, in the right context, why evolution is considered to be a scientific theory." However, "Teachers of subjects such as RE, history or citizenship may deal with creationism and intelligent design in their lessons." [ n 4 ] The British Centre for Science Education lobbying group has the goal of "countering creationism within the UK" and has been involved in government lobbying in the UK in this regard. [ 157 ] Northern Ireland 's Department for Education says that the curriculum provides an opportunity for alternative theories to be taught. The Democratic Unionist Party (DUP)—which has links to fundamentalist Christianity—has been campaigning to have intelligent design taught in science classes. A DUP former Member of Parliament, David Simpson , has sought assurances from the education minister that pupils will not lose marks if they give creationist or intelligent design answers to science questions. [ 167 ] [ 168 ] In 2007, Lisburn city council voted in favor of a DUP recommendation to write to post-primary schools asking what their plans are to develop teaching material in relation to "creation, intelligent design and other theories of origin." [ 169 ] Plans by Dutch Education Minister Maria van der Hoeven to "stimulate an academic debate" on the subject in 2005 caused a severe public backlash. [ 170 ] After the 2006 elections , she was succeeded by Ronald Plasterk , described as a "molecular geneticist, staunch atheist and opponent of intelligent design." [ 171 ] As a reaction on this situation in the Netherlands, the Director General of the Flemish Secretariat of Catholic Education (VSKO) in Belgium , Mieke Van Hecke, declared that: "Catholic scientists already accepted the theory of evolution for a long time and that intelligent design and creationism doesn't belong in Flemish Catholic schools. It's not the tasks of the politics to introduce new ideas, that's task and goal of science." [ 172 ] Relation to Islam Muzaffar Iqbal, a notable Pakistani-Canadian Muslim, signed the A Scientific Dissent From Darwinism petition of the Discovery Institute. [ 173 ] Ideas similar to intelligent design have been considered respected intellectual options among Muslims, and in Turkey many intelligent design books have been translated. In Istanbul in 2007, public meetings promoting intelligent design were sponsored by the local government, [ 174 ] and David Berlinski of the Discovery Institute was the keynote speaker at a meeting in May 2007. [ 175 ] Relation to ISKCON In 2011, the International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON) Bhaktivedanta Book Trust published an intelligent design book titled Rethinking Darwin: A Vedic Study of Darwinism and Intelligent Design . The book included contributions from intelligent design advocates William A. Dembski, Jonathan Wells and Michael Behe as well as from Hindu creationists Leif A. Jensen and Michael Cremo . [ 176 ] Australia The status of intelligent design in Australia is somewhat similar to that in the UK (see Education in Australia ). In 2005, the Australian Minister for Education, Science and Training , Brendan Nelson , raised the notion of intelligent design being taught in science classes. The public outcry caused the minister to quickly concede that the correct forum for intelligent design, if it were to be taught, is in religion or philosophy classes. [ 177 ] [ 178 ] The Australian chapter of Campus Crusade for Christ distributed a DVD of the Discovery Institute's documentary Unlocking the Mystery of Life (2002) to Australian secondary schools. [ 179 ] The head of one of Australia's leading private schools supported use of the DVD in the classroom at the discretion of teachers and principals. [ 180 ] See also Book: Creationism and Intelligent Design Creationism portal Abiogenesis Buddhism and evolution Clockwork universe Creation and evolution in public education Day-age creationism Evolution as fact and theory Gap creationism Haldane's dilemma Hindu views on evolution History of evolutionary thought History of the creation–evolution controversy Intelligent design in politics Intelligent falling International Society for Complexity, Information, and Design Islamic views on evolution List of works on intelligent design List of topics characterized as pseudoscience Jainism and non-creationism Materialism Modern evolutionary synthesis Naturalism (philosophy) Natural philosophy Neo-creationism Neo-Darwinism Objections to evolution Philosophy of science Progressive creationism Raëlian intelligent design Santorum Amendment Scientific method Social Darwinism Sternberg peer review controversy " Strengths and weaknesses of evolution " The eclipse of Darwinism Unintelligent design Young Earth creationism (YEC) Notes ^ "Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District Trial transcript: Day 6 (October 5), PM Session, Part 1" . TalkOrigins Archive . Houston, TX: The TalkOrigins Foundation, Inc . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . Q. Has the Discovery Institute been a leader in the intelligent design movement? A. Yes, the Discovery Institute's Center for Science and Culture. Q. And are almost all of the individuals who are involved with the intelligent design movement associated with the Discovery Institute? A. All of the leaders are, yes. — Barbara Forrest , 2005, testifying in the Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District trial. Wilgoren 2005 , "...the institute's Center for Science and Culture has emerged in recent months as the ideological and strategic backbone behind the eruption of skirmishes over science in school districts and state capitals across the country." "Frequently Asked Questions About 'Intelligent Design ' " . American Civil Liberties Union . New York: American Civil Liberties Union. September 16, 2005. Who is behind the ID movement? . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . Kahn, Joseph P. (July 27, 2005). "The evolution of George Gilder" . The Boston Globe (New York: The New York Times Company ) . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . "WHO's WHO: Intelligent Design Proponents" (PDF) . Science & Theology News (Durham, NC: Science & Theology News, Inc.). November 2005. ISSN 1530-6410 . Retrieved 2007-07-20 . Attie, et al. 2006 , "The engine behind the ID movement is the Discovery Institute." ^ Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District , 04 cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Context, pp. 25–26 . " ID’s 'official position' does not acknowledge that the designer is God", "...[T]he writings of leading ID proponents reveal that the designer postulated by their argument is the God of Christianity." Context, p. 35 . "defense experts Professors Behe and Minnich testified that ID is not creationism". Williams, Devon (December 14, 2007). "Friday Five: William A. Dembski" . CitizenLink.com . Colorado Springs, CO: Focus on the Family Action, Inc. Archived from the original on 2007-12-17 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . I believe God created the world for a purpose. The Designer of intelligent design is, ultimately, the Christian God. — William A. Dembski , a senior fellow of the Discovery Institute's Center for Science and Culture, when asked in an interview whether his research concluded that God is the Intelligent Designer. ^ a b Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District , 04 cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Context, pp. 24–25 . "the argument for ID is not a new scientific argument , but is rather an old religious argument for the existence of God. He traced this argument back to at least Thomas Aquinas in the 13th century, who framed the argument as a syllogism: Wherever complex design exists, there must have been a designer; nature is complex; therefore nature must have had an intelligent designer. ... ...[T]his argument for the existence of God was advanced early in the 19th century by Reverend Paley... [the teleological argument ] The only apparent difference between the argument made by Paley and the argument for ID, as expressed by defense expert witnesses Behe and Minnich, is that ID's 'official position' does not acknowledge that the designer is God." ^ a b "Guidance on the place of creationism and intelligent design in science lessons" . Teachernet . London: Department for Children, Schools and Families . Archived from the original (DOC) on 2008-01-08 . Retrieved 2007-10-01 . The intelligent design movement claims there are aspects of the natural world that are so intricate and fit for purpose that they cannot have evolved but must have been created by an 'intelligent designer'. Furthermore they assert that this claim is scientifically testable and should therefore be taught in science lessons. Intelligent design lies wholly outside of science. Sometimes examples are quoted that are said to require an 'intelligent designer'. However, many of these have subsequently been shown to have a scientific explanation, for example, the immune system and blood clotting mechanisms. Attempts to establish an idea of the 'specified complexity' needed for intelligent design are surrounded by complex mathematics. Despite this, the idea seems to be essentially a modern version of the old idea of the 'God-of-the-gaps'. Lack of a satisfactory scientific explanation of some phenomena (a 'gap' in scientific knowledge) is claimed to be evidence of an intelligent designer. ^ a b Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District , pages 26–27 , "the writings of leading ID proponents reveal that the designer postulated by their argument is the God of Christianity." Examples include: Nickson, Elizabeth (February 6, 2004). "Let's Be Intelligent about Darwin" . National Post (Reprint) (Toronto, Ontario: Postmedia Network). ISSN 1486-8008 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Our strategy has been to change the subject a bit, so that we can get the issue of intelligent design, which really means the reality of God, before the academic world and into the schools. — Phillip E. Johnson (2003) Grelen, Jay (November 30, 1996). "Witnesses for the prosecution" . World (Asheville, NC: God's World Publications) 11 (28): 18. ISSN 0888-157X . Retrieved 2014-02-16 . This isn't really, and never has been, a debate about science. It's about religion and philosophy. Johnson 2002 , "So the question is: 'How to win?' That's when I began to develop what you now see full-fledged in the 'wedge' strategy: 'Stick with the most important thing'—the mechanism and the building up of information. Get the Bible and the Book of Genesis out of the debate because you do not want to raise the so-called Bible-science dichotomy. Phrase the argument in such a way that you can get it heard in the secular academy and in a way that tends to unify the religious dissenters. That means concentrating on, 'Do you need a Creator to do the creating, or can nature do it on its own?' and refusing to get sidetracked onto other issues, which people are always trying to do." ^ Ted, Koppel (Host) (August 10, 2005). "Doubting Darwin: The Marketing of Intelligent Design" . Nightline . American Broadcasting Company . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . I think the designer is God ... — Stephen C. Meyer Pearcey 2004 , pp. 204–205, "By contrast, design theory demonstrates that Christians can sit in the supernaturalist's 'chair' even in their professional lives, seeing the cosmos through the lens of a comprehensive biblical worldview. Intelligent Design steps boldly into the scientific arena to build a case based on empirical data. It takes Christianity out of the ineffectual realm of value and stakes out a cognitive claim in the realm of objective truth. It restores Christianity to its status as genuine knowledge, equipping us to defend it in the public arena." ^ Bridgham, Jamie T.; Carroll, Sean M.; Thornton, Joseph W. (April 7, 2006). "Evolution of Hormone-Receptor Complexity by Molecular Exploitation" . Science (Washington, D.C.: American Association for the Advancement of Science ) 312 (5770): 97–101. Bibcode : 2006Sci...312...97B . doi : 10.1126/science.1123348 . PMID 16601189 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Bridgham, et al. , showed that gradual evolutionary mechanisms can produce complex protein-protein interaction systems from simpler precursors. ^ Orr 2005 . This article draws from the following exchange of letters in which Behe admits to sloppy prose and non-logical proof: Behe, Michael ; Dembski, William A.; Wells, Jonathan ; Nelson, Paul A. ; Berlinski, David (March 26, 2003). "Has Darwin Met His Match? - Letters: An Exchange Over ID" . Center for Science and Culture (Reprint). Seattle, WA: Discovery Institute . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Dembski, William A. (2001). "Another Way to Detect Design?" . Metanexus . New York: Metanexus Institute . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . This is a "three part lecture series entitled 'Another Way to Detect Design' which contains William Dembski's response to Fitelson, Stephens, and Sober whose article 'How Not to Detect Design' ran on Metanexus:Views (2001.09.14, 2001.09.21, and 2001.09.28). These lectures were first made available online at Metanexus: The Online Forum on Religion and Science http://www.metanexus.net . This is from three keynote lectures delivered October 5–6, 2001 at the Society of Christian Philosopher's meeting at the University of Colorado, Boulder." ^ "CSC - Top Questions: Questions About Intelligent Design: What is the theory of intelligent design?" . Center for Science and Culture . Seattle, WA: Discovery Institute . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . The theory of Intelligent Design holds that certain features of the universe and of living things are best explained by an intelligent cause, not an undirected process such as natural selection. ^ "FAQ: Who designed the designer?" . Intelligent Design and Evolution Awareness Center (Short answer). Seattle, WA: Casey Luskin; IDEA Center . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . One need not fully understand the origin or identity of the designer to determine that an object was designed. Thus, this question is essentially irrelevant to intelligent design theory, which merely seeks to detect if an object was designed. ...Intelligent design theory cannot address the identity or origin of the designer—it is a philosophical / religious question that lies outside the domain of scientific inquiry. Christianity postulates the religious answer to this question that the designer is God who by definition is eternally existent and has no origin. There is no logical philosophical impossibility with this being the case (akin to Aristotle 's 'unmoved mover') as a religious answer to the origin of the designer. ^ Pennock 2001 , "Wizards of ID: Reply to Dembski," pp. 645–667, "Dembski chides me for never using the term 'intelligent design' without conjoining it to 'creationism'. He implies (though never explicitly asserts) that he and others in his movement are not creationists and that it is incorrect to discuss them in such terms, suggesting that doing so is merely a rhetorical ploy to 'rally the troops'. (2) Am I (and the many others who see Dembski's movement in the same way) misrepresenting their position? The basic notion of creationism is the rejection of biological evolution in favor of special creation, where the latter is understood to be supernatural. Beyond this there is considerable variability..." ^ a b c "The Wedge" (PDF) . Seattle, WA: Center for the Renewal of Science and Culture . 1999 . Retrieved 2014-05-31 . The social consequences of materialism have been devastating. As symptoms, those consequences are certainly worth treating. However, we are convinced that in order to defeat materialism, we must cut it off at its source. That source is scientific materialism. This is precisely our strategy. If we view the predominant materialistic science as a giant tree, our strategy is intended to function as a 'wedge' that, while relatively small, can split the trunk when applied at its weakest points. The very beginning of this strategy, the 'thin edge of the wedge,' was Phillip Johnson's critique of Darwinism begun in 1991 in Darwinism on Trial , and continued in Reason in the Balance and Defeating Darwinism by Opening Minds . Michael Behe's highly successful Darwin's Black Box followed Johnson's work. We are building on this momentum, broadening the wedge with a positive scientific alternative to materialistic scientific theories, which has come to be called the theory of intelligent design (ID). Design theory promises to reverse the stifling dominance of the materialist worldview, and to replace it with a science consonant with Christian and theistic convictions. ^ a b c Johnson, Phillip E . "How The Evolution Debate Can Be Won" . Coral Ridge Ministries . Fort Lauderdale, FL: Coral Ridge Ministries. Archived from the original on 2007-11-07 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . I have built an intellectual movement in the universities and churches that we call The Wedge, which is devoted to scholarship and writing that furthers this program of questioning the materialistic basis of science. [...] Now the way that I see the logic of our movement going is like this. The first thing you understand is that the Darwinian theory isn't true. It's falsified by all of the evidence and the logic is terrible. When you realize that, the next question that occurs to you is, well, where might you get the truth? [...] I start with John 1:1. In the beginning was the word. In the beginning was intelligence, purpose, and wisdom. The Bible had that right. And the materialist scientists are deluding themselves. — Johnson, "Reclaiming America for Christ Conference" (1999) ^ a b "Does intelligent design postulate a "supernatural creator?" . Discovery Institute . Seattle, WA: Discovery Institute. Truth Sheet # 09-05 . Retrieved 2007-07-19 . ...intelligent design does not address metaphysical and religious questions such as the nature or identity of the designer. [...] '...the nature, moral character and purposes of this intelligence lie beyond the competence of science and must be left to religion and philosophy.' ^ Johnson, Phillip E. (April 1999). "Keeping the Darwinists Honest" . Citizen (Colorado Springs, CO: Focus on the Family ). ISSN 1084-6832 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ID is an intellectual movement, and the Wedge strategy stops working when we are seen as just another way of packaging the Christian evangelical message. [...] The evangelists do what they do very well, and I hope our work opens up for them some doors that have been closed. ^ "Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District Trial transcript: Day 6 (October 5), PM Session, Part 2" . TalkOrigins Archive . Houston, TX: The TalkOrigins Foundation, Inc . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . What I am talking about is the essence of intelligent design, and the essence of it is theistic realism as defined by Professor Johnson. Now that stands on its own quite apart from what their motives are. I'm also talking about the definition of intelligent design by Dr. Dembski as the Logos theology of John's Gospel. That stands on its own. [...] Intelligent design, as it is understood by the proponents that we are discussing today, does involve a supernatural creator, and that is my objection. And I am objecting to it as they have defined it, as Professor Johnson has defined intelligent design, and as Dr. Dembski has defined intelligent design. And both of those are basically religious. They involve the supernatural. — Barbara Forrest, 2005, testifying in the Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District trial. ^ Geoffroy, Gregory (June 1, 2007). "Statement from Iowa State University President Gregory Geoffroy" . News Service: Iowa State University . Ames, OH: Iowa State University . Retrieved 2007-12-16 . Rennie, John ; Mirsky, Steve (April 16, 2008). "Six Things in Expelled That Ben Stein Doesn't Want You to Know..." . Scientific American . Stuttgart, Germany: Georg von Holtzbrinck Publishing Group . ISSN 0036-8733 . Retrieved 2014-06-24 . Vedantam, Shankar (February 5, 2006). "Eden and Evolution" . The Washington Post . p. W08 . Retrieved 2008-02-16 . GMU spokesman Daniel Walsch denied that the school had fired Crocker. She was a part-time faculty member, he said, and was let go at the end of her contract period for reasons unrelated to her views on intelligent design. ^ Gauch 2003 , Chapters 5–8. Discusses principles of induction, deduction and probability related to the expectation of consistency, testability, and multiple observations. Chapter 8 discusses parsimony (Occam's razor). ^ Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District ,  cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Whether ID Is Science, p. 64 . The ruling discusses central aspects of expectations in the scientific community that a scientific theory be testable, dynamic, correctible, progressive, based upon multiple observations, and provisional. ^ See, e.g., Fitelson, Stephens & Sober 2001 , "How Not to Detect Design–Critical Notice: William A. Dembski The Design Inference ," pp. 597–616. Intelligent design fails to pass Occam's razor. Adding entities (an intelligent agent, a designer) to the equation is not strictly necessary to explain events. ^ See, e.g., Schneider, Jill E. "Professor Schneider's thoughts on Evolution and Intelligent Design" . Department of Biological Sciences . Bethlehem, PA: Lehigh University . Archived from the original on 2006-09-02 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Q: Why couldn't intelligent design also be a scientific theory? A: The idea of intelligent design might or might not be true, but when presented as a scientific hypothesis, it is not useful because it is based on weak assumptions, lacks supporting data and terminates further thought. ^ See, e.g., Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District ,  cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Context, p. 22 and Whether ID Is Science, p. 77 . The designer is not falsifiable, since its existence is typically asserted without sufficient conditions to allow a falsifying observation. The designer being beyond the realm of the observable, claims about its existence can be neither supported nor undermined by observation, making intelligent design and the argument from design analytic a posteriori arguments. ^ See, e.g., Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District ,  cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Context, p. 22 and Whether ID Is Science, p. 66 . That intelligent design is not empirically testable stems from the fact that it violates a basic premise of science, naturalism. ^ See, e.g., the brief explanation in Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District , 04 cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Whether ID Is Science, p. 66 . Intelligent design professes to offer an answer that does not need to be defined or explained, the intelligent agent, designer. By asserting a conclusion that cannot be accounted for scientifically, the designer , intelligent design cannot be sustained by any further explanation, and objections raised to those who accept intelligent design make little headway. Thus intelligent design is not a provisional assessment of data, which can change when new information is discovered. Once it is claimed that a conclusion that need not be accounted for has been established, there is simply no possibility of future correction. The idea of the progressive growth of scientific ideas is required to explain previous data and any previously unexplainable data. ^ "Nobel Laureates Initiative" (PDF) (Letter). The Elie Wiesel Foundation for Humanity. September 9, 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2005-10-07 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . The September 2005 statement by 38 Nobel laureates stated that: "...intelligent design is fundamentally unscientific; it cannot be tested as scientific theory because its central conclusion is based on belief in the intervention of a supernatural agent." ^ "Intelligent Design is not Science: Scientists and teachers speak out" . Faculty of Science . Sydney: University of New South Wales . October 2005. Archived from the original on 2006-06-14 . Retrieved 2009-01-09 . The October 2005 statement, by a coalition representing more than 70,000 Australian scientists and science teachers said: "intelligent design is not science" and "urge all Australian governments and educators not to permit the teaching or promulgation of ID as science." ^ Johnson 1996b , "My colleagues and I speak of 'theistic realism'—or sometimes, 'mere creation'—as the defining concept of our [the ID] movement. This means that we affirm that God is objectively real as Creator, and that the reality of God is tangibly recorded in evidence accessible to science, particularly in biology." ^ Watanabe, Teresa (March 25, 2001). "Enlisting Science to Find the Fingerprints of a Creator" . Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . 'We are taking an intuition most people have and making it a scientific and academic enterprise. ...'We are removing the most important cultural roadblock to accepting the role of God as creator.' — Phillip E. Johnson ^ Brauer, Matthew J.; Forrest, Barbara ; Gey, Steven G. (2005). "Is It Science Yet?: Intelligent Design Creationism and the Constitution" (PDF) . Washington University Law Review (St. Louis, MO: Washington University School of Law ) 83 (1): 79–80. ISSN 2166-7993 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ID leaders know the benefits of submitting their work to independent review and have established at least two purportedly 'peer-reviewed' journals for ID articles. However, one has languished for want of material and quietly ceased publication, while the other has a more overtly philosophical orientation. Both journals employ a weak standard of 'peer review' that amounts to no more than vetting by the editorial board or society fellows. ^ Isaak, Mark (ed.). "CI001.4: Intelligent Design and peer review" . TalkOrigins Archive . Houston, TX: The TalkOrigins Foundation, Inc . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . With some of the claims for peer review, notably Campbell and Meyer (2003) and the e-journal PCID, the reviewers are themselves ardent supporters of intelligent design. The purpose of peer review is to expose errors, weaknesses, and significant omissions in fact and argument. That purpose is not served if the reviewers are uncritical. ^ Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District ,  cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Whether ID Is Science, p. 81 . "For human artifacts, we know the designer's identity, human, and the mechanism of design, as we have experience based upon empirical evidence that humans can make such things, as well as many other attributes including the designer's abilities, needs, and desires. With ID, proponents assert that they refuse to propose hypotheses on the designer's identity, do not propose a mechanism, and the designer, he/she/it/they, has never been seen. In that vein, defense expert Professor Minnich agreed that in the case of human artifacts and objects, we know the identity and capacities of the human designer, but we do not know any of those attributes for the designer of biological life. In addition, Professor Behe agreed that for the design of human artifacts, we know the designer and its attributes and we have a baseline for human design that does not exist for design of biological systems. Professor Behe's only response to these seemingly insurmountable points of disanalogy was that the inference still works in science fiction movies." ^ "WIRED Magazine response" . Illustra Media . La Habra, CA: Illustra Media. Archived from the original on 2008-12-20 . Retrieved 2007-07-13 . It's also important that you read a well developed rebuttal to Wired's misleading accusations. Links to both the article and a response by the Discovery Institute (our partners in the production of Unlocking the Mystery of Life and The Privileged Planet ) are available below. Ratliff, Evan (October 2004). "The Crusade Against Evolution" . Wired (New York: Condé Nast) (12.10) . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . "Wired magazine reporter criticized for agenda driven reporting" . Center for Science and Culture . Seattle, WA: Discovery Institute. October 13, 2004 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . References ^ Boudry, Maarten ; Blancke, Stefaan; Braeckman, Johan (December 2010). "Irreducible Incoherence and Intelligent Design: A Look into the Conceptual Toolbox of a Pseudoscience". The Quarterly Review of Biology (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press ) 85 (4): 473–482. doi : 10.1086/656904 . PMID 21243965 . Article available from Universiteit Gent ^ Pigliucci 2010 ^ "CSC - Top Questions: Questions About Intelligent Design: What is the theory of intelligent design?" . Center for Science and Culture . Seattle, WA: Discovery Institute . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . "Intelligent Design Theory in a Nutshell" (PDF) . Seattle, WA: Intelligent Design and Evolution Awareness Center . 2004 . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . "Intelligent Design" . Intelligent Design network . Shawnee Mission, KS: Intelligent Design network, inc . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . ^ a b c d e f g Forrest, Barbara (May 2007). "Understanding the Intelligent Design Creationist Movement: Its True Nature and Goals" (PDF) . Center for Inquiry . Washington, D.C.: Center for Inquiry . Retrieved 2007-08-06 . ^ a b See: List of scientific societies explicitly rejecting intelligent design Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District , 04 cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Whether ID Is Science, p. 83 The Discovery Institute's A Scientific Dissent From Darwinism petition begun in 2001 has been signed by "over 700 scientists" as of August 20, 2006. The four-day A Scientific Support for Darwinism petition gained 7,733 signatories from scientists opposing ID. AAAS 2002 . The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), the largest association of scientists in the U.S., has 120,000 members, and firmly rejects ID. More than 70,000 Australian scientists "...urge all Australian governments and educators not to permit the teaching or promulgation of ID as science." National Center for Science Education : List of statements from scientific professional organizations on the status intelligent design and other forms of creationism in the sciences. Nature Methods 2007 , "Long considered a North American phenomenon, pro-ID interest groups can also be found throughout Europe. ...Concern about this trend is now so widespread in Europe that in October 2007 the Council of Europe voted on a motion calling upon member states to firmly oppose the teaching of creationism as a scientific discipline." Dean 2007 , "There is no credible scientific challenge to the theory of evolution as an explanation for the complexity and diversity of life on earth." ^ "An intelligently designed response" . Nature Methods (Editorial) (London: Nature Publishing Group ) 4 (12): 983. December 2007. doi : 10.1038/nmeth1207-983 . ISSN 1548-7091 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Meyer, Stephen C. (December 1, 2005). "Not by chance" . National Post (Don Mills, Ontario: CanWest MediaWorks Publications Inc. ) . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Meyer, Stephen C.; Nelson, Paul A. (May 1, 1996). "Getting Rid of the Unfair Rules" . Origins & Design (Book review) (Colorado Springs, CO: Access Research Network ) . Retrieved 2007-05-20 . Johnson, Phillip E. (May–June 1996). "Third-Party Science" . Books & Culture (Book review) 2 (3) . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . The review is reprinted in full by Access Research Network [archived 10 February 1999]. Meyer, Stephen C. (2000). "The Scientific Status of Intelligent Design: The Methodological Equivalence of Naturalistic and Non-Naturalistic Origins Theories". Science and Evidence for Design in the Universe: Papers Presented at a Conference Sponsored by the Wethersfield Institute, New York City, September 25, 1999 . Proceedings of the Wethersfield Institute 9 . San Francisco, CA: Ignatius Press . ISBN 0-89870-809-5 . LCCN 00102374 . OCLC 45720008 . Retrieved 2014-12-01 . Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District , 04 cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Whether ID Is Science, p. 66 Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District , 04 cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Whether ID Is Science, p. 68 . Lead defense expert Professor Behe admitted that his broadened definition of science, which encompasses ID, would also include astrology. See also Hanna, John (February 13, 2007). "Kansas Rewriting Science Standards" . Guardian Unlimited (London: Guardian Media Group ). Associated Press . Archived from the original on 2007-02-16 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Giberson, Karl W. (April 21, 2014). "My Debate With an 'Intelligent Design' Theorist" . The Daily Beast (New York: The Newsweek Daily Beast Company ) . Retrieved 2014-05-14 . ^ a b c d e f Scott, Eugenie C. ; Matzke, Nicholas J. (May 15, 2007). "Biological design in science classrooms" . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences ) 104 (Suppl 1): 8669–8676. Bibcode : 2007PNAS..104.8669S . doi : 10.1073/pnas.0701505104 . PMC 1876445 . PMID 17494747 . Retrieved 2009-06-02 . abstract ^ a b Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District , 04 cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Whether ID Is Science, p. 64 . ^ a b McDonald, John H. "A reducibly complex mousetrap" . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Ussery, David (December 1997). "A Biochemist's Response to 'The Biochemical Challenge to Evolution ' " (Book review) . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Originally published in Bios (July 1998) 70:40–45. ^ a b c Haught, John F. (April 1, 2005). "Report of John F. Haught, Ph. D" (PDF) . Retrieved 2013-08-29 . Haught's expert report in Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District . ^ a b c d e Matzke, Nick (January–April 2006). "Design on Trial: How NCSE Helped Win the Kitzmiller Case" . Reports of the National Center for Science Education (Berkeley, CA: National Center for Science Education ) 26 (1–2): 37–44. ISSN 2158-818X . Retrieved 2009-11-18 . Matzke, Nick (November 7, 2005). "Missing Link discovered!" . Evolution Education and the Law (Blog). Berkeley, CA: National Center for Science Education. Archived from the original on 2007-01-14 . Retrieved 2009-11-18 . ^ a b Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District , 04 cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Context, pp. 31–33 . ^ Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District , 04 cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Context, p. 32 ff , citing Edwards v. Aguillard , 482 U.S. 578 (1987). ^ "Media Backgrounder: Intelligent Design Article Sparks Controversy" . Center for Science and Culture . Seattle, WA: Discovery Institute. September 7, 2004 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Johnson, Phillip E. (June 2002). Berkeley's Radical . Touchstone: A Journal of Mere Christianity 15 (5). Interview with James M. Kushiner (Chicago, IL: Fellowship of St. James). ISSN 0897-327X . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . Johnson interviewed in November 2000. Wilgoren, Jodi (August 21, 2005). "Politicized Scholars Put Evolution on the Defensive" . The New York Times . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Downey 2006 ^ Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District , 04 cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Whether ID Is Science, p. 69 and Curriculum, Conclusion, p. 136 . ^ a b c d Padian, Kevin ; Matzke, Nicholas J. (January 1, 2009). "Darwin, Dover, ‘Intelligent Design’ and textbooks" (PDF) . Biochemical Journal (London: Portland Press ) 417 (1): 29–42. doi : 10.1042/bj20081534 . ISSN 0264-6021 . PMID 19061485 . Retrieved 2015-11-10 . ^ Ayala, Francisco J. (2007). Darwin's Gift to Science and Religion . Washington, D.C.: Joseph Henry Press . pp. 6, 15–16, 138. ISBN 978-0-309-10231-5 . LCCN 2007005821 . OCLC 83609838 . Ayala writes that "Paley made the strongest possible case for intelligent design," and refers to "Intelligent Design: The Original Version" before discussing ID proponents reviving the argument from design with the pretence that it is scientific. ^ Pennock 1999 , pp. 60, 68–70, 242–245 Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District , 04 cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Context, pp. 24–25 . ^ a b Forrest, Barbara C. (March 11, 2006). Know Your Creationists: Know Your Allies . Daily Kos . Interview with Andrew Stephen (Berkeley, CA: Kos Media, LLC). OCLC 59226519 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ a b Meyer, Stephen C. (March 1986). "We Are Not Alone" . Eternity (Philadelphia, PA: Evangelical Foundation Inc.). ISSN 0014-1682 . Retrieved 2007-10-10 . ^ Thaxton, Charles B. (November 13–16, 1986). DNA, Design and the Origin of Life . Jesus Christ: God and Man. Dallas, TX. Archived from the original on 2007-09-27 . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . ^ a b Thaxton, Charles B. (June 24–26, 1988). In Pursuit of Intelligent Causes: Some Historical Background . Sources of Information Content in DNA. Tacoma, WA. OCLC 31054528 . Retrieved 2007-10-06 . Revised July 30, 1988, and May 6, 1991. ^ a b c Dembski, William A. (July–August 1999). "Signs of Intelligence: A Primer on the Discernment of Intelligent Design" . Touchstone: A Journal of Mere Christianity (Chicago, IL: Fellowship of St. James) 12 (4). ISSN 0897-327X . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ...[I]ntelligent design is just the Logos theology of John's Gospel restated in the idiom of information theory. ^ a b Dao, James (December 25, 2005). "2005: In a Word; Intelligent Design" . The New York Times . Retrieved 2013-08-23 . Dao states that the Discovery Institute said the phrase may have first been used by F. C. S. Schiller : his essay "Darwinism and Design," published in The Contemporary Review for June 1897, evaluated objections to the teleological argument raised by natural selection , and said "...it will not be possible to rule out the supposition that the process of Evolution may be guided by an intelligent design." pp. 128, 141 ^ a b c Matzke, Nick (August 14, 2007). "The true origin of 'intelligent design ' " . The Panda's Thumb (Blog). Houston, TX: The TalkOrigins Foundation, Inc . Retrieved 2012-07-03 . ^ Matzke gives as examples the August 21, 1847, issue of Scientific American , and an 1861 letter in which Charles Darwin uses "intelligent Design" to denote John Herschel 's view that the overlapping changes of species found in geology had needed "intelligent direction": "The Utility and Pleasures of Science" . Scientific American (New York) 2 (48): 381. August 21, 1847. doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican08211847-381 . ISSN 0036-8733 . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . Darwin, Charles (May 23, 1861). "Darwin, C. R. to Herschel, J. F. W." . Darwin Correspondence Project . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Library . Letter 3154 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . , discussing a footnote Herschel had added in January 1861 to his Physical Geology (see footnotes to pp. 190–191 in Francis Darwin's Life and Letters .) Luskin, Casey (September 8, 2008). "A Brief History of Intelligent Design" . Center for Science and Culture . Seattle, WA: Discovery Institute . Retrieved 2012-07-08 . Luskin quotes examples of use of the phrase by F. C. S. Schiller and Fred Hoyle . ^ Forrest, Barbara (April 1, 2005). "Expert Witness Report" (PDF) . Retrieved 2013-05-30 . Forrest's expert report in Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District . ^ Elsberry, Wesley R. (December 5, 1996). "Enterprising Science Needs Naturalism" . Talk Reason . Retrieved 2013-08-23 . ^ Witt, Jonathan (December 20, 2005). "Dover Judge Regurgitates Mythological History of Intelligent Design" . Evolution News & Views . Seattle, WA: Discovery Institute . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . ^ Safire, William (August 21, 2005). "Neo-Creo" . The New York Times . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . ^ a b c Matzke, Nick (November 23, 2004). "Critique: 'Of Pandas and People ' " . National Center for Science Education (Blog). Berkeley, CA: National Center for Science Education . Retrieved 2007-09-24 . ^ Aulie, Richard P. (1998). "A Reader's Guide to Of Pandas and People" . McLean, VA: National Association of Biology Teachers . Retrieved 2007-10-05 . ^ Matzke, Nick (October 13, 2005). "I guess ID really was 'Creationism's Trojan Horse' after all" . The Panda's Thumb (Blog). Houston, TX: The TalkOrigins Foundation, Inc . Retrieved 2009-06-02 . ^ Dembski, William A. (March 29, 2005). "Expert Witness Report: The Scientific Status of Intelligent Design" (PDF) . Retrieved 2009-06-02 . Dembski's expert report in Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District . ^ Ruse 1992 , p. 41 ^ Lynn, Leon (Winter 1997–1998). "Creationists Push Pseudo-Science Text" . Rethinking Schools (Milwaukee, WI: Rethinking Schools, Ltd.) 12 (2). ISSN 0895-6855 . Retrieved 2009-02-08 . ^ Behe, Michael (1997). "Molecular Machines: Experimental Support for the Design Inference" . Apologetics.org . Trinity, FL: The Apologetics Group; Trinity College of Florida . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . "This paper was originally presented in the Summer of 1994 at the meeting of the C.S. Lewis Society, Cambridge University." ^ Irreducible complexity of these examples is disputed; see Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District , 04 cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Whether ID Is Science, pp. 76–78 , and Kenneth R. Miller 's January 3, 2006, lecture at Case Western Reserve University 's Strosacker Auditorium, "The Collapse of Intelligent Design: Will the Next Monkey Trial be in Ohio?" on YouTube . ^ Miller, Kenneth R. "The Flagellum Unspun: The Collapse of 'Irreducible Complexity ' " . Biology by Miller & Levine . Rehoboth, MA: Miller and Levine Biology . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . "This is a pre-publication copy of an article that appeared in 'Debating Design from Darwin to DNA,' edited by Michael Ruse and William Dembski." ^ a b Wallis, Claudia (August 7, 2005). "The Evolution Wars" . Time (New York: Time Inc. ) . Retrieved 2011-10-22 . ^ Dembski 1999 , p. 47 ^ Photograph of William A. Dembski by Wesley R. Elsberry, taken at lecture given at University of California, Berkeley , March 17, 2006. ^ Fitelson, Branden; Stephens, Christopher; Sober, Elliott (September 1999). "How Not to Detect Design" (PDF) . Philosophy of Science (Book review) (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press ) 66 (3): 472–488. doi : 10.1086/392699 . ISSN 0031-8248 . JSTOR 188598 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ a b Wein, Richard (2002). "Not a Free Lunch But a Box of Chocolates: A critique of William Dembski's book No Free Lunch " . TalkOrigins Archive . Houston, TX: The TalkOrigins Foundation, Inc . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . ^ Baldwin, Rich (July 14, 2005). "Information Theory and Creationism: William Dembski" . TalkOrigins Archive . Houston, TX: The TalkOrigins Foundation, Inc . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . Rosenhouse, Jason (Fall 2001). "How Anti-Evolutionists Abuse Mathematics" (PDF) . The Mathematical Intelligencer (Berlin; New York: Springer Science+Business Media ) 23 (4): 3–8. doi : 10.1007/bf03024593 . OCLC 3526661 . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . ^ Perakh, Mark (March 18, 2005). "Dembski 'displaces Darwinism' mathematically – or does he?" . Talk Reason . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . ^ Wilkins, John S.; Elsberry, Wesley R. (November 2001). "The Advantages of Theft over Toil: The Design Inference and Arguing from Ignorance" . Biology and Philosophy (Dordrecht: Springer Science+Business Media) 16 (5): 709–722. doi : 10.1023/A:1012282323054 . ISSN 0169-3867 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Dawkins 2006 ^ Marks, Paul (July 28, 2007). "Evolutionary algorithms now surpass human designers" . New Scientist (London: Reed Business Information ) (2614): 26–27. ISSN 0262-4079 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Gonzalez 2004 ^ Stenger 2011 , p. 243 ^ Susskind 2005 ^ Stenger, Victor J . "Is The Universe Fine-Tuned For Us?" (PDF) . Victor J. Stenger . Boulder, CO: University of Colorado . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Stenger, Victor J. "The Anthropic Principle" (PDF) . Victor J. Stenger . Boulder, CO: University of Colorado . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . ^ Silk, Joseph (September 14, 2006). "Our place in the Multiverse" . Nature (London: Nature Publishing Group) 443 (7108): 145–146. Bibcode : 2006Natur.443..145S . doi : 10.1038/443145a . ISSN 0028-0836 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Feinberg & Shapiro 1993 , "A Puddlian Fable," pp. 220–221 ^ Pennock 1999 , pp. 229–229, 233–242 ^ Dembski, William A. (August 10, 1998). "The Act of Creation: Bridging Transcendence and Immanence" . Center for Science and Culture . Seattle, WA: Discovery Institute . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . "Presented at Millstatt Forum, Strasbourg, France, 10 August 1998." ^ a b Coyne, Jerry (August 22, 2005). "The Case Against Intelligent Design: The Faith That Dare Not Speak Its Name" . The New Republic . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ a b Behe 1996 , p. 221 ^ a b Pennock 1999 , pp. 245–249, 265, 296–300 ^ Simanek, Donald E. (February 2006). "Intelligent Design: The Glass is Empty" . Donald Simanek's Pages . Lock Haven, PA: Lock Haven University of Pennsylvania . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . ^ Rosenhouse, Jason (November 3, 2006). "Who Designed the Designer?" . Committee for Skeptical Inquiry . Intelligent Design Watch. Amherst, NY: Center for Inquiry . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Dawkins 1986 , p. 141 ^ See for example Manson, Joseph (September 27, 2005). "Intelligent design is pseudoscience" . UCLA Today . Retrieved 2014-05-14 . Rev. Illuminatus Maximus (July–August 2006). "The Incredibly Strange Story of Intelligent Design" . New Dawn (Melbourne, Victoria: NGCI Pty Ltd) (97) . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ "Evolving Banners at the Discovery Institute" . National Center for Science Education . Berkeley, CA: National Center for Science Education. August 28, 2002 . Retrieved 2007-10-07 . ^ Mu, David (Fall 2005). "Trojan Horse or Legitimate Science: Deconstructing the Debate over Intelligent Design" (PDF) . Harvard Science Review (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Science Review, Inc.) 19 (1): 22–25 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ...for most members of the mainstream scientific community, ID is not a scientific theory, but a creationist pseudoscience. ^ a b See: Workosky, Cindy (August 3, 2005). "National Science Teachers Association Disappointed About Intelligent Design Comments Made by President Bush" (Press release). Arlington, VA: National Science Teachers Association . Retrieved 2014-01-14 . 'We stand with the nation's leading scientific organizations and scientists [...] in stating that intelligent design is not science. Intelligent design has no place in the science classroom,' said Gerry Wheeler, NSTA Executive Director. [...] 'It is simply not fair to present pseudoscience to students in the science classroom,' said NSTA President Mike Padilla. 'Nonscientific viewpoints have little value in increasing students' knowledge of the natural world.' Mu 2005 ^ Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District , 04 cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Curriculum, Conclusion, p. 136 . ^ Wise, Donald U. (January 2001). "Creationism's Propaganda Assault on Deep Time and Evolution" . Journal of Geoscience Education (Bellingham, WA: National Association of Geoscience Teachers ) 49 (1): 30–35. ISSN 1089-9995 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Ross, Marcus R. (May 2005). "Who Believes What? Clearing up Confusion over Intelligent Design and Young-Earth Creationism" (PDF) . Journal of Geoscience Education (Bellingham, WA: National Association of Geoscience Teachers) 53 (3): 319–323. ISSN 1089-9995 . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . ^ Numbers 2006 ^ Forrest & Gross 2004 ^ Pennock 1999 ^ Scott, Eugenie C. (July–August 1999). "The Creation/Evolution Continuum" . Reports of the National Center for Science Education (Berkeley, CA: National Center for Science Education) 19 (4): 16–17, 23–25 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Scott 2004 ^ "Discovery Institute - Fellows" . Discovery Institute . Seattle, WA: Discovery Institute . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Discovery Institute fellows and staff. "CSC - Center for Science and Culture" . Center for Science and Culture . Seattle, WA: Discovery Institute . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Center for Science and Culture fellows and staff. ^ Forrest 2001 , "The Wedge at Work: How Intelligent Design Creationism Is Wedging Its Way into the Cultural and Academic Mainstream" ^ Kippley-Ogman, Emma. "Judaism & Intelligent Design" . MyJewishLearning.com . New York: MyJewishLearning, Inc . Retrieved 2010-11-13 . But there are also Jewish voices in the intelligent design camp. David Klinghoffer, a Discovery Institute fellow, is an ardent advocate of intelligent design. In an article in The Forward (August 12, 2005), he claimed that Jewish thinkers have largely ignored intelligent design and contended that Jews, along with Christians, should adopt the theory because beliefs in God and in natural selection are fundamentally opposed. ^ Meyer 2009 , "Michael Denton, an agnostic, argues for intelligent design in Evolution: A Theory in Crisis, 326–43." ^ Frame 2009 , p. 291 , "In contrast to the other would-be pioneers of Intelligent Design, Denton describes himself as an agnostic, and his book was released by a secular publishing house." ^ "CSC - Top Questions: General Questions: Is Discovery Institute a religious organization?" . Center for Science and Culture . Seattle, WA: Discovery Institute . Retrieved 2010-11-13 . Discovery Institute is a secular think tank, and its Board members and Fellows represent a variety of religious traditions, including mainline Protestant, Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Jewish, and agnostic. Until recently the Chairman of Discovery's Board of Directors was former Congressman John Miller, who is Jewish. Although it is not a religious organization, the Institute has a long record of supporting religious liberty and the legitimate role of faith-based institutions in a pluralistic society. In fact, it sponsored a program for several years for college students to teach them the importance of religious liberty and the separation of church and state. ^ Edis 2004 , "Grand Themes, Narrow Constituency," p. 12 : "Among Muslims involved with ID, the most notable is Muzaffar Iqbal, a fellow of the International Society for Complexity, Information, and Design, a leading ID organization." ^ Shanks 2004 , p. 11 : "Muzaffar Iqbal, president of the Center for Islam and Science, has recently endorsed work by intelligent design theorist William Dembski." ^ a b Johnson, Phillip E. (July–August 1999). "The Wedge: Breaking the Modernist Monopoly on Science" . Touchstone: A Journal of Mere Christianity (Chicago, IL: Fellowship of St. James) 12 (4). ISSN 0897-327X . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Dembski 1998 ^ Dembski 1999 , p. 210 ^ Dembski, William (February 1, 2005). "Intelligent Design's Contribution to the Debate Over Evolution: A Reply to Henry Morris" . DesignInference.com . Pella, IA: William Dembski . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Dixon 2008 , p. 82 ^ Ross, Hugh (July 2002). "More Than Intelligent Design" . Facts for Faith (Glendora, CA: Reasons to Believe ) (10). OCLC 52894856 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Morris, Henry M. (July 1999). "Design Is Not Enough!" . Back to Genesis (Santee, CA: Institute for Creation Research ) (127). OCLC 26390403 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Wieland, Carl (August 30, 2002). "AiG's views on the Intelligent Design Movement" . Answers in Genesis . Hebron, KY: Answers in Genesis Ministries International. Archived from the original on 2002-10-15 . Retrieved April 25, 2007 . ^ National Academy of Sciences 1999 , p. 25 ^ Attie, Alan D.; Sober, Elliott ; Numbers, Ronald L. ; Amasino, Richard M. ; Cox, Beth; Berceau, Terese ; Powell, Thomas; Cox, Michael M. (May 1, 2006). "Defending science education against intelligent design: a call to action" . Journal of Clinical Investigation (Ann Arbor, MI: American Society for Clinical Investigation ) 116 (5): 1134–1138. doi : 10.1172/JCI28449 . ISSN 0021-9738 . PMC 1451210 . PMID 16670753 . Retrieved 2012-06-16 . ^ Lovan, Dylan (September 24, 2012). "Bill Nye Warns: Creation Views Threaten US Science" . Associated Press . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Fowler, Jonathan; Rodd, Elizabeth (August 23, 2012). "Bill Nye: Creationism Is Not Appropriate For Children" . YouTube . New York: Big Think . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ "Sign - Dissent from Darwin" . dissentfromdarwin.org . Seattle, WA: Discovery Institute . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ "Doubts Over Evolution Mount With Over 300 Scientists Expressing Skepticism With Central Tenet of Darwin's Theory" . Center for Science and Culture . Seattle, WA: Discovery Institute. April 1, 2004 . Retrieved 2014-01-02 . ^ Evans, Skip (April 8, 2002). "Doubting Darwinism Through Creative License" . National Center for Science Education (Blog). Berkeley, CA: National Center for Science Education . Retrieved 2011-04-25 . ^ Chang, Kenneth (February 21, 2006). "Few Biologists But Many Evangelicals Sign Anti-Evolution Petition" . The New York Times . Retrieved 2008-01-04 . ^ Luskin, Casey (June 1, 2011). "A Scientific Analysis of Karl Giberson and Francis Collins' The Language of Science and Faith " . Evolution News & Views . Seattle, WA: Discovery Institute . Retrieved 2014-01-02 . ^ "Nearly Two-thirds of U.S. Adults Believe Human Beings Were Created by God" . The Harris Poll . Rochester, NY: Harris Interactive . July 6, 2005. #52. Archived from the original on 2005-12-17 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ "Sandia National Laboratories says that the Intelligent Design Network (IDNet-NM/Zogby) 'Lab Poll' is BOGUS!" . New Mexicans for Science and Reason . Peralta, NM: NMSR . Retrieved 2007-07-13 . ^ Mooney, Chris (September 11, 2003). "Polling for ID" . Committee for Skeptical Inquiry (Blog). Amherst, NY: Center for Inquiry. Archived from the original on 2008-03-27 . Retrieved 2007-02-16 . ^ Harris, David (July 30, 2003). " ' Intelligent Design'-ers launch new assault on curriculum using lies and deception" . Salon (Blog). San Francisco, CA: Salon Media Group. Archived from the original on 2003-08-16 . Retrieved 2007-07-13 . ^ "In U.S., 42% Believe Creationist View of Human Origins" . Gallup.Com . Omaha, NE: Gallup, Inc . Retrieved 2016-01-30 . ^ Dean, Cornelia (September 27, 2007). "Scientists Feel Miscast in Film on Life's Origin" . The New York Times . Retrieved 2014-05-14 . ^ Burbridge-Bates, Lesley (August 14, 2007). "What Happened to Freedom of Speech?" (PDF) (Press release). Los Angeles, CA: Motive Entertainment; Premise Media Corporation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-12-01 . Retrieved 2014-05-14 . ^ a b Whipple, Dan (December 16, 2007). "Science Sunday: Intelligent Design Goes to the Movies" . The Colorado Independent (Blog) (Washington, D.C.: American Independent News Network ) . Retrieved 2014-05-14 . ^ Emerson, Jim (December 17, 2008). "Ben Stein: No argument allowed" . RogerEbert.com (Blog). Chicago, IL: Ebert Digital LLC . Retrieved 2014-05-14 . One spokesman comes close to articulating a thought about Intelligent Design: 'If you define evolution precisely, though, to mean the common descent of all life on earth from a single ancestor via undirected mutation and natural selection -- that's a textbook definition of neo-Darwinism -- biologists of the first rank have real questions... 'Intelligent Design is the study of patterns in nature that are best explained as a result of intelligence.' ^ Catsoulis, Jeannette (April 18, 2008). "Resentment Over Darwin Evolves Into a Documentary" . The New York Times (Movie review) . Retrieved 2014-05-14 . ^ Simon, Stephanie (May 2, 2008). "Evolution's Critics Shift Tactics With Schools" . The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 2014-05-14 . ^ Lempinen, Edward W. (April 18, 2008). "New AAAS Statement Decries 'Profound Dishonesty' of Intelligent Design Movie" . Washington, D.C.: American Association for the Advancement of Science. Archived from the original on 2008-04-25 . Retrieved 2008-04-20 . ^ Frankowski, Nathan (Director) (2008). Expelled: No Intelligence Allowed (Motion picture). Premise Media Corporation; Rampant Films. OCLC 233721412 . ^ Mosher, Dave (April 3, 2008). "New Anti-Evolution Film Stirs Controversy" . LiveScience . New York: Space Holdings Corp. Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Josh Timonen, " Expelled Overview ," The Richard Dawkins Center for Reason and Science," 24 March 2008. Retrieved 13 March 2015. ^ Elmes, Kantowitz & Roediger 2006 . Chapter 2 discusses the scientific method, including the principles of falsifiability, testability, progressive development of theory, dynamic self-correcting of hypotheses, and parsimony, or "Occam's razor." ^ See, e.g., Perakh, Mark (2005). "The Dream World of William Dembski's Creationism" . Skeptic (Altadena, CA: The Skeptics Society ) 11 (4): 54–65. ISSN 1063-9330 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Forrest, Barbara (Fall–Winter 2000). "Methodological Naturalism and Philosophical Naturalism: Clarifying the Connection" . Philo (Amherst, NY: Center for Inquiry) 3 (2): 7–29. doi : 10.5840/philo20003213 . ISSN 1098-3570 . Retrieved 2007-07-27 . ^ Johnson 1995 . Johnson positions himself as a "theistic realist" against "methodological naturalism." ^ a b Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District ,  cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Whether ID is Science, p. 87 ^ "Statement from the Council of the Biological Society of Washington" . Proceedings of the Biological Society of Washington (Washington, D.C.: Biological Society of Washington ) 117 (3): 241. 2004. ISSN 0006-324X . OCLC 1536434 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ "Peer-Reviewed & Peer-Edited Scientific Publications Supporting the Theory of Intelligent Design (Annotated)" . Center for Science and Culture . Seattle, WA: Discovery Institute. February 1, 2012 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . The July 1, 2007, version of page is Archived August 4, 2007 at the Wayback Machine . ^ Shaw, Linda (March 31, 2005). "Does Seattle group 'teach controversy' or contribute to it?" . The Seattle Times ( The Seattle Times Company ) . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ "Small Group Wields Major Influence in Intelligent Design Debate" . World News Tonight (New York: American Broadcasting Company ). November 9, 2005 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Mooney, Chris (December 2002). "Survival of the Slickest" . The American Prospect (Washington, D.C.) 13 (22) . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ID's home base is the Center for Science and Culture at Seattle's conservative Discovery Institute. Meyer directs the center; former Reagan adviser Bruce Chapman heads the larger institute, with input from the Christian supply-sider and former American Spectator owner George Gilder (also a Discovery senior fellow). From this perch, the ID crowd has pushed a 'teach the controversy' approach to evolution that closely influenced the Ohio State Board of Education's recently proposed science standards, which would require students to learn how scientists 'continue to investigate and critically analyze' aspects of Darwin's theory. ^ Dembski, William A. (February 27, 2001). "Teaching Intelligent Design -- What Happened When? A Response to Eugenie Scott" . Metanexus . New York: Metanexus Institute . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . The clarion call of the intelligent design movement is to 'teach the controversy.' There is a very real controversy centering on how properly to account for biological complexity (cf. the ongoing events in Kansas), and it is a scientific controversy. Dembski's response to Eugenie Scott's February 12, 2001, essay published by Metanexus, "The Big Tent and the Camel's Nose." ^ Matzke, Nick (July 11, 2006). "No one here but us Critical Analysis-ists…" . The Panda's Thumb (Blog). Houston, TX: The TalkOrigins Foundation, Inc . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Nick Matzke's analysis shows how teaching the controversy using the Critical Analysis of Evolution model lesson plan is a means of teaching all the intelligent design arguments without using the intelligent design label. ^ Annas 2006 , "That this controversy is one largely manufactured by the proponents of creationism and intelligent design may not matter, and as long as the controversy is taught in classes on current affairs, politics, or religion, and not in science classes, neither scientists nor citizens should be concerned." ^ "Statement on the Teaching of Evolution" (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: American Association for the Advancement of Science. February 16, 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2006-02-21 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Some bills seek to discredit evolution by emphasizing so-called 'flaws' in the theory of evolution or 'disagreements' within the scientific community. Others insist that teachers have absolute freedom within their classrooms and cannot be disciplined for teaching non-scientific 'alternatives' to evolution. A number of bills require that students be taught to 'critically analyze' evolution or to understand 'the controversy.' But there is no significant controversy within the scientific community about the validity of the theory of evolution. The current controversy surrounding the teaching of evolution is not a scientific one. ^ Scott, Eugenie C. ; Branch, Glenn (August 12, 2002) [Reprinted with permission from School Board News , August 13, 2002]. " ' Intelligent Design' Not Accepted by Most Scientists" . National Center for Science Education (Blog). Berkeley, CA: National Center for Science Education . Retrieved 2009-11-18 . ^ Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District , 04 cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Whether ID Is Science, pp. 71–74 . ^ Merriman 2007 , p. 26 ^ Murphy, George L. (2002). "Intelligent Design as a Theological Problem" . Covalence: The Bulletin of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America Alliance for Faith, Science and Technology (Chicago, IL: Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, Division for Ministry) IV (2). OCLC 52753579 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Reprinted with permission. ^ Darwin 1860 , p. 484, "...probably all the organic beings which have ever lived on this earth have descended from some one primordial form, into which life was first breathed by the Creator." ^ Dembski, William A. (Spring 2003). "Making the Task of Theodicy Impossible? Intelligent Design and the Problem of Evil" (PDF) . DesignInference.com . Pella, IA: William Dembski . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ a b Ratzsch, Del (October 3, 2010). "Teleological Arguments for God's Existence" . In Zalta, Edward N . The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Stanford, CA: The Metaphysics Research Lab. Section 4.3, The "Intelligent Design" (ID) Movement. ISSN 1095-5054 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ See, for instance: Bube, Richard H. (Fall 1971). "Man Come Of Age: Bonhoeffer's Response To The God-Of-The-Gaps" (PDF) . Journal of the Evangelical Theological Society (Louisville, KY: Evangelical Theological Society ) 14 (4): 203–220. ISSN 0360-8808 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Ronan , p. 61 ^ Ronan , p. 123 ^ "Intelligent Design on Trial: Kitzmiller v. Dover National Center for Science Education" . National Center for Science Education . Berkeley, CA: National Center for Science Education. October 17, 2008 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Matzke 2006a ^ Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District , 04 cv 2688 (United States District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania December 20, 2005). Memorandum and Order, July 27, 2005. ^ Powell, Michael (December 21, 2005). "Judge Rules Against 'Intelligent Design ' " . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 2007-09-28 . Retrieved 2007-09-03 . ^ Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District , 04 cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Whether ID Is Science, p. 89 ^ Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District , 04 cv 2688 (December 20, 2005). Curriculum, Conclusion, pp. 137–138 ^ Crowther, Robert (December 20, 2005). "Dover Intelligent Design Decision Criticized as a Futile Attempt to Censor Science Education" . Evolution News & Views . Seattle, WA: Discovery Institute . Retrieved 2007-09-03 . ^ Raffaele, Martha (December 20, 2005). "Intelligent design policy struck down" . Dallas Morning News . Associated Press. Archived from the original on 2007-09-30 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . "Judge rules against 'intelligent design ' " . NBCNews.com . Contributions by Alan Boyle . Associated Press. December 20, 2005 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Provonsha, Matthew (September 21, 2006). "Godless: The Church of Liberalism" . eSkeptic (Book review). ISSN 1556-5696 . Retrieved 2007-09-03 . ^ Padian, Kevin; Matzke, Nick (January 4, 2006). "Discovery Institute tries to "swift-boat" Judge Jones" . National Center for Science Education (Blog). Berkeley, CA: National Center for Science Education . Retrieved 2009-11-18 . ^ "Editor's Note: Intelligent Design Articles" (PDF) . Montana Law Review (Missoula, MT: University of Montana School of Law ) 68 (1): 1–5. Winter 2007. ISSN 0026-9972 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ DeWolf, David K.; West, John G. ; Luskin, Casey (Winter 2007). "Intelligent Design Will Survive Kitzmiller v. Dover " (PDF) . Montana Law Review (Missoula, MT: University of Montana School of Law) 68 (1): 7–57. ISSN 0026-9972 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Irons, Peter (Winter 2007). "Disaster In Dover: The Trials (And Tribulations) Of Intelligent Design" (PDF) . Montana Law Review (Missoula, MT: University of Montana School of Law) 68 (1): 59–87. ISSN 0026-9972 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ DeWolf, David K.; West, John G.; Luskin, Casey (Winter 2007). "Rebuttal to Irons" (PDF) . Montana Law Review (Missoula, MT: University of Montana School of Law) 68 (1): 89–94. ISSN 0026-9972 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Brayton, Ed (June 7, 2007). "Irons Responds to West, Luskin and DeWolf" . Dispatches from the Creation Wars (Blog). ScienceBlogs LLC . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ "American Academy of Religion on teaching creationism" . National Center for Science Education . Berkeley, CA: National Center for Science Education. July 23, 2010 . Retrieved 2010-08-09 . ^ a b "The dangers of creationism in education" . Committee on Culture, Science and Education (Report). Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe . June 8, 2007. Doc. 11297 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . "The dangers of creationism in education" . Committee on Culture, Science and Education (Report). Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe. September 17, 2007. Doc. 11375 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . "The dangers of creationism in education" . Committee on Culture, Science and Education (Resolution). Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe. October 4, 2007. Resolution 1580 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ "Council of Europe approves resolution against creationism" . National Center for Science Education . Berkeley, CA: National Center for Science Education . Retrieved 2009-11-18 . Reilhac, Gilbert (October 4, 2007). "Council of Europe firmly opposes creationism in school" . Reuters . Retrieved 2007-10-05 . ^ Meyer, Stephen C.; Allen, W. Peter (July 15, 2004). "Unlocking the Mystery of Life" . Center for Science and Culture (Preview). Seattle, WA: Discovery Institute . Retrieved 2007-07-13 . ^ Randerson, James (November 26, 2006). "Revealed: rise of creationism in UK school" . The Guardian (London: Guardian Media Group) . Retrieved 2008-10-17 . ^ " ' Design' attack on school science" . BBC News (London: BBC ). September 29, 2006 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ "Truth in Science" . Parliamentary Debates (Hansard) . House of Commons. November 1, 2006. col. 455W–456W. ^ "Schools: Intelligent Design" . Parliamentary Debates (Hansard) . House of Lords. December 18, 2006. col. WA257–WA258. ^ "Guidance on creationism for British teachers" . National Center for Science Education . Berkeley, CA: National Center for Science Education. February 2, 2007 . Retrieved 2009-11-18 . ^ "How can we answer questions about creation and origins?" (PDF) . Qualifications and Curriculum Authority . 2006 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ "nocrescied - epetition response" . Number10.gov.uk . London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office . June 21, 2007. Archived from the original on 2008-10-15 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . "The UK [government's] position on creationism and Intelligent Design in science classes" . British Centre for Science Education . British Centre for Science Education . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ "The creation of a new Giant's Causeway row" . Belfast Telegraph (Dublin: Independent News & Media ). November 30, 2007 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Henry, Lesley-Anne (September 26, 2007). "Tussle of Biblical proportions over creationism in Ulster classrooms" . Belfast Telegraph (Dublin: Independent News & Media) . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . "Viewpoint: The world, according to Lisburn folk" . Belfast Telegraph (Dublin: Independent News & Media). September 27, 2007 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ "Dup Call For Schools To Teach Creation Passed By Council" . Ulster Star (Edinburgh: Johnston Publishing Ltd. ). September 26, 2007 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Enserink, Martin (June 3, 2005). "Evolution Politics: Is Holland Becoming the Kansas of Europe?". Science (Washington, D.C.: American Association for the Advancement of Science) 308 (5727): 1394. doi : 10.1126/science.308.5727.1394b . PMID 15933170 . ^ "Cabinet ministers announced (update 2)" . DutchNews.nl (Amsterdam: Dutch News BV). February 13, 2007 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ " Katholieke wetenschappers hebben de evolutietheorie al lang aanvaard ". De Morgen (Brussels: De Persgroep Nederland ). May 23, 2005. ^ Edis, Taner (November–December 1999). "Cloning Creationism in Turkey" . Reports of the National Center for Science Education (Berkeley, CA: National Center for Science Education) 19 (6): 30–35. ISSN 2158-818X . Retrieved 2009-11-18 . ^ Edis, Taner (January 2008). "Islamic Creationism: A Short History" . Newsletter (Notre Dame, IN: History of Science Society ) 37 (1) . Retrieved 2011-04-20 . ^ Jones, Dorian L. (March 12, 2008). "Turkey's survival of the fittest" . Security Watch . Zurich: International Relations and Security Network . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ^ Jensen 2011 ^ Wroe, David (August 11, 2005). " ' Intelligent design' an option: Nelson" . The Age (Sydney: Fairfax Media ) . Retrieved 2014-03-02 . ^ Smith, Deborah (October 21, 2005). "Intelligent design not science: experts" . The Sydney Morning Herald (Sydney: Fairfax Media) . Retrieved 2007-07-13 . ^ Kruger, Paula (August 26, 2005). "Brendan Nelson suggests 'intelligent design' could be taught in schools" . PM (Transcript) (Sydney: ABC Radio National ) . Retrieved 2011-10-22 . ^ Green, Shane (October 28, 2005). "School backs intelligent design DVD" . The Age (Sydney: Fairfax Media) . Retrieved 2011-10-22 . Further reading Books Behe, Michael J. (1996). Darwin's Black Box: The Biochemical Challenge to Evolution . New York: Free Press . ISBN 0-684-82754-9 . LCCN 96000695 . OCLC 34150540 . Bliss, Richard B. (1976). Gish, Duane T. ; Moore, John N., eds. Origins: Two Models: Evolution, Creation . San Diego, CA: Creation-Life Publishers. ISBN 0-890510-27-X . LCCN 76020178 . OCLC 2597773 . Bliss, Richard B. (1988). Unfred, David W., ed. Origins: Creation or Evolution . El Cajon, CA: Master Books. ISBN 0-890511-32-2 . LCCN 92190747 . OCLC 29517556 . Coyne, Jerry A. (2009). Why Evolution is True . Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-923084-6 . LCCN 2008042122 . OCLC 259716035 . Darwin, Charles (1860). On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life (Fifth Thousand [2nd] ed.). London: John Murray . LCCN 05016315 . OCLC 1184673 . The book is available in the PDF format from The Complete Work of Charles Darwin Online . Davis, Percival ; Kenyon, Dean H. (1993) [Originally published 1989]. Thaxton, Charles B. , ed. Of Pandas and People: The Central Question of Biological Origins (2nd ed.). Dallas, TX: Haughton Publishing Co. ISBN 0-914513-40-0 . LCCN 00711376 . OCLC 27973099 . Dawkins, Richard (1986). The Blind Watchmaker: Why the Evidence of Evolution Reveals a Universe without Design . Illustrations by Liz Pyle (1st American ed.). New York: W. W. Norton & Company . ISBN 0-393-02216-1 . LCCN 85004960 . OCLC 802616493 . Dawkins, Richard (2006). The God Delusion . Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Company . ISBN 978-0-618-68000-9 . LCCN 2006015506 . OCLC 68965666 . Dembski, William A. (1998). The Design Inference: Eliminating Chance through Small Probabilities . Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press . ISBN 0-521-62387-1 . LCCN 98003020 . OCLC 38551103 . Dembski, William A. (1999). Intelligent Design: The Bridge Between Science & Theology . Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press . ISBN 0-8308-2314-X . LCCN 99037141 . OCLC 41628252 . Dixon, Thomas (2008). Science and Religion: A Very Short Introduction . New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-929551-7 . LCCN 2008023565 . OCLC 269622437 . Elmes, David G.; Kantowitz, Barry H.; Roediger, Henry L. (2006). Research Methods in Psychology (8th ed.). Australia; Belmont, CA: Thomson/Wadsworth . ISBN 0-534-60976-7 . LCCN 2005925207 . OCLC 61721527 . Forrest, Barbara ; Gross, Paul R. (2004). Creationism's Trojan Horse: The Wedge of Intelligent Design . Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-515742-7 . LCCN 2002192677 . OCLC 50913078 . Frame, Tom (2009). Evolution in the Antipodes: Charles Darwin and Australia . Sydney: UNSW Press. ISBN 978-1-921410-76-5 . LCCN 2009286878 . OCLC 271821761 . Gauch, Jr., Hugh G. (2003). Scientific Method in Practice . New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-01708-4 . LCCN 2002022271 . OCLC 49225684 . Gonzalez, Guillermo ; Richards, Jay W. (2004). The Privileged Planet: How Our Place in the Cosmos is Designed for Discovery . Washington, D.C.: Regnery Publishing . ISBN 978-0-89526-065-9 . LCCN 2004000421 . OCLC 54046478 . Huchingson, James E., ed. (1993). Religion and the Natural Sciences: The Range of Engagement . Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College Publishers . ISBN 0-030522-53-6 . LCCN 92081266 . OCLC 27833414 . Humes, Edward (2007). Monkey Girl: Evolution, Education, Religion, and the Battle for America's Soul (1st ed.). New York: Ecco . ISBN 978-0-06-088548-9 . LCCN 2006050263 . OCLC 71223542 . Jensen, Leif A. (2011). Rethinking Darwin: A Vedic Study of Darwinism and Intelligent Design . Contributors: Wells, Jonathan ; Dembski, William A.; Behe, Michael J.; Cremo, Michael A. Bhaktivedanta Book Trust . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Johnson, Phillip E. (1991). Darwin on Trial . Washington, D.C.: Regnery Gateway . ISBN 0-8952-6535-4 . LCCN 90026218 . OCLC 22906277 . Johnson, Phillip E. (1995). Reason in the Balance: The Case Against Naturalism in Science, Law & Education . Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press. ISBN 0-830-81610-0 . LCCN 95012620 . OCLC 32384818 . Johnson, Phillip E. (1997). Defeating Darwinism by Opening Minds . Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press. ISBN 0-8308-1360-8 . LCCN 97012916 . OCLC 36621960 . Johnson, Phillip E. (2000). The Wedge of Truth: Splitting the Foundations of Naturalism . Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press. ISBN 0-8308-2267-4 . LCCN 00039586 . OCLC 43903750 . Merriman, Scott A. (2007). Religion and the Law in America: An Encyclopedia of Personal Belief and Public Policy 1 . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO . ISBN 978-1-85109-863-7 . LCCN 2007002579 . OCLC 163590129 . Meyer, Stephen C. (2009). Signature in the Cell (1st ed.). New York: HarperOne . ISBN 978-0-06-147278-7 . LCCN 2008051773 . OCLC 232978147 . Numbers, Ronald L. (2006) [Originally published 1992 as The Creationists: The Evolution of Scientific Creationism ; New York: Alfred A. Knopf ]. The Creationists: From Scientific Creationism to Intelligent Design (Expanded ed., 1st Harvard University Press pbk. ed.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press . ISBN 0-674-02339-0 . LCCN 2006043675 . OCLC 69734583 . Pearcey, Nancy (2004). Total Truth: Liberating Christianity from Its Cultural Captivity . Foreword by Phillip E. Johnson. Wheaton, IL: Crossway Books . ISBN 1-58134-458-9 . LCCN 2003019514 . OCLC 52980609 . Pennock, Robert T. (1999). Tower of Babel: The Evidence Against the New Creationism . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press . ISBN 0-262-16180-X . LCCN 98027286 . OCLC 44966044 . Pennock, Robert T , ed. (2001). Intelligent Design Creationism and Its Critics: Philosophical, Theological, and Scientific Perspectives . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press . ISBN 0-262-66124-1 . LCCN 2001031276 . OCLC 46729201 . Pigliucci, Massimo (2010). "Science in the Courtroom: The Case against Intelligent Design" (PDF) . Nonsense on Stilts: How to Tell Science from Bunk . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. pp. 160–186. ISBN 978-0-226-66786-7 . LCCN 2009049778 . OCLC 457149439 . Ronan, Colin A. (1983). The Cambridge Illustrated History of the World's Science . Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-25844-8 . LCCN 87673896 . OCLC 10411883 . Ruse, Michael (1992). " Of Pandas and People ". In Hughes, Liz Rank. Reviews of Creationist Books (Book review) (2nd ed.). Berkeley, CA: National Center for Science Education . ISBN 0-939873-52-4 . OCLC 29343847 . Scott, Eugenie C. (2004). Evolution vs. Creationism: An Introduction . Foreword by Niles Eldredge . Westport, CT: Greenwood Press . ISBN 0-313-32122-1 . LCCN 2004044214 . OCLC 54752786 . Shanks, Niall (2004). God, the Devil, and Darwin: A Critique of Intelligent Design Theory . Foreword by Richard Dawkins. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-516199-8 . LCCN 2003042916 . OCLC 51769083 . Shermer, Michael (2006). Why Darwin Matters: The Case Against Intelligent Design (1st ed.). New York: Times Books . ISBN 978-0-8050-8121-3 . LCCN 2006041243 . OCLC 64511220 . Slack, Gordy (2007). The Battle over the Meaning of Everything: Evolution, Intelligent Design, and a School Board in Dover, PA . San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass . ISBN 978-0-7879-8786-2 . LCCN 2007005825 . OCLC 84903217 . Stenger, Victor J. (2011). The Fallacy of Fine-Tuning: Why the Universe Is Not Designed for Us . Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books . ISBN 978-1-61614-443-2 . LCCN 2010049901 . OCLC 679931691 . Susskind, Leonard (2005). The Cosmic Landscape: String Theory and the Illusion of Intelligent Design (1st ed.). New York: Little, Brown and Company . ISBN 0-316-15579-9 . LCCN 2005018796 . OCLC 60798474 . Thaxton, Charles B.; Bradley, Walter L. ; Olsen, Roger L. (1984). The Mystery of Life's Origin: Reassessing Current Theories . Foreword by Dean H. Kenyon . New York: Philosophical Library ; Copyright 1984 by Foundation for Thought and Ethics . ISBN 0-8022-2447-4 . LCCN 83017463 . OCLC 9895509 . Wells, Jonathan (2000). Icons of Evolution: Science or Myth?: Why Much of What We Teach About Evolution is Wrong . Washington, D.C.: Regnery Publishing. ISBN 0-89526-276-2 . LCCN 00062544 . OCLC 44768911 . Young, Matt; Edis, Taner, eds. (2004). Why Intelligent Design Fails: A Scientific Critique of the New Creationism . New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press . ISBN 0-8135-3433-X . JSTOR 40072957 . LCCN 2003020100 . OCLC 59717533 . Zimmer, Carl (2001). Evolution: The Triumph of an Idea . Introduction by Stephen Jay Gould ; foreword by Richard Hutton (1st ed.). New York: HarperCollins . ISBN 0-06-019906-7 . LCCN 2001024077 . OCLC 46359440 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ID perspectives Center for Science and Culture A program of the Discovery Institute Non-ID perspectives "AAAS Board Resolution on Intelligent Design Theory" . Washington, D.C.: American Association for the Advancement of Science . October 18, 2002. Archived from the original on 2002-11-13 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . ACLU site on Intelligent Design "Are There Any Important Differences between Intelligent Design and Creationism?" (PDF) by Jason Rosenhouse for the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry , February 24, 2006 "The Design Argument" (PDF) by Elliott Sober , 2004 "Design Arguments for the Existence of God" An entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy (ISSN 2161-0002), founded by James Fieser "Intelligent Design?" Special report prepared by Richard Milner and Vittorio Maestro for Natural History magazine "Kitzmiller: An Intelligent Ruling on 'Intelligent Design'" by JURIST guest columnist Stephen G. Gey , December 29, 2005 Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District (PDF) A 139-page in-depth opinion of intelligent design, irreducible complexity, and the book Of Pandas and People by U.S. District Judge John E. Jones III National Academy of Sciences (1999). Science and Creationism: A View from the National Academy of Sciences (2nd ed.). Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press . ISBN 0-309-06406-6 . LCCN 99006259 . OCLC 43803228 . "Natural 'Knowledge' and Natural 'Design'" by Richard Dawkins , May 15, 2006 TalkOrigins Archive Archive of the Usenet discussion group talk.origins Texas Citizens for Science "What Is Intelligent Design Creationism?" National Center for Science Education, October 17, 2008 Media articles and audio video resources Adler, Margot (Host) (September 5, 2005). "Intelligent Design: Scientific Inquiry or Religious Indoctrination?" . Justice Talking (Podcast). Annenberg Public Policy Center . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Annas, George J. (May 25, 2006). "Intelligent Judging — Evolution in the Classroom and the Courtroom" . The New England Journal of Medicine (Waltham, MA: Massachusetts Medical Society ) 354 (21): 2277–2281. doi : 10.1056/NEJMlim055660 . ISSN 0028-4793 . PMID 16723620 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Baynton, Douglas (December 17, 2005). " ' Intelligent Design' Deja Vu" . The Washington Post . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . "Debating Evolution in the Classroom" . NPR (Story archive) (Washington, D.C.: National Public Radio, Inc.) . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Downey, Roger (February 1, 2006). "Discovery's Creation" . Seattle Weekly (Phoenix, AZ: Village Voice Media ) . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . "Evolution - Charles Darwin's 200th Birthday" . The New York Times . February 10, 2009 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Articles, opinions, and features commemorating the birth of Charles Darwin Grier, Peter; Burek, Josh (December 21, 2005). "Banned in biology class: intelligent design" . Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA: Christian Science Publishing Society ). ISSN 0882-7729 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Johnstone, Gary (Director); McMaster, Joseph (Director) (November 13, 2007). "Judgment Day: Intelligent Design on Trial" . Nova . Season 35 . PBS . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . "Kitzmiller in the York Daily Record" . National Center for Science Education . Berkeley, CA: National Center for Science Education. September 11, 2015 . Retrieved 2015-10-22 . Lemonick, Michael (December 20, 2005). "Darwin Victorious" . Time (New York: Time Inc. ) . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Orr, H. Allen (May 30, 2005). "Devolution" . The New Yorker (New York: Condé Nast ) . Retrieved 2014-02-28 . Links to related articles v t e Pseudoscience Terminology Cargo cult science Charlatan Crank Fringe theory Fringe science Pseudoarcheology Pseudohistory Junk science Paranormal Pathological science Quackery Snake oil Superseded scientific theories True-believer syndrome Voodoo science Examples 2012 phenomenon Acupuncture Alchemy Alternative medicine Ancient astronauts Anthroposophic medicine Applied kinesiology Astrology Bates method Biodynamic agriculture Bloodletting Body memory Conversion therapy Catastrophism Chiropractic Chromotherapy Colon cleansing Conspiracy theory Moon landing conspiracy theories Creation science Crystal healing Cryptozoology Dianetics Dowsing Ear candling Germ theory denialism HIV/AIDS denialism Homeopathy Humorism Intelligent design Japhetic theory Lunar effect Lysenkoism Magnet therapy Melanin theory Naturopathy Nazi archaeology Nibiru cataclysm Numerology Perpetual motion Orgone Phrenology Polygraph Quantum mysticism Reiki Scientific racism Aryan Race Trepanning Ufology Resources Committee for Skeptical Inquiry Cults of Unreason Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science Quackwatch JREF The Ragged Edge of Science The Skeptic Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience Skeptical Inquirer The Skeptic's Dictionary Snopes.com List of topics characterized as pseudoscience v t e Philosophy of religion Concepts in religion Afterlife Euthyphro dilemma Faith Intelligent design Miracle Problem of evil Religious belief Soul Spirit Theodicy Theological veto Conceptions of God Aristotelian view Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism Holy Spirit Maltheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Bahá'í Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Consciousness Cosmological Kalam Contingency Degree Desire Experience Fine-tuning of the Universe Love Miracles Morality Ontological Pascal's Wager Proper basis Reason Teleological Natural law Watchmaker analogy Transcendental Against 747 Gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Agnostic Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism more... Religious language Eschatological verification Language-game Logical positivism Apophatic theology Verificationism Problem of evil Augustinian theodicy Best of all possible worlds Euthyphro dilemma Inconsistent triad Irenaean theodicy Natural evil Theodicy Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and Medieval Heraclitus Augustine of Hippo Boethius Anselm of Canterbury Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Averroes Thomas Aquinas Maimonides Pico della Mirandola Desiderius Erasmus Enlightenment René Descartes Blaise Pascal Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W. K. Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religions Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Political science of religion Faith and rationality more... Portal Category v t e Philosophy Branches Traditional Metaphysics Epistemology Logic Ethics Aesthetics Philosophy of Action Art Culture Design Music Film Being Business Color Dialogue Education Environment Futility Happiness Healthcare History Human nature Humor Feminism Language Literature Mathematics Mind Pain Psychology Philosophy Religion Science Physics Chemistry Biology Geography Sexuality Social science Economics Justice Law Politics Society Space and time Sport Technology Artificial intelligence Computer science Engineering Information War Schools of thought By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Neotaoism Taoism Yangism Zen Greco- Roman Aristotelianism Atomism Cynicism Cyrenaics Eleatics Eretrian school Epicureanism Hermeneutics Ionian Ephesian Milesian Megarian school Neoplatonism Peripatetic Platonism Pluralism Presocratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism Neopythagoreanism Sophism Stoicism Indian Buddhist Cārvāka Hindu Jain Persian Mazdakism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval 9th–16th century European Christian philosophy Scholasticism Thomism Renaissance humanism East Asian Korean Confucianism Edo Neo-Confucianism Neo-Confucianism Indian Dvaita Navya-Nyāya Vishishtadvaita Islamic Averroism Avicennism Persian Illuminationism Ilm al-Kalam Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern 17th–19th century People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo-Kantianism Hegelianism Marxism Spinozism Ideal / Material Determinism Dualism Empiricism Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Classical realism Materialism Monism Naturalism Pragmatism Reductionism Rationalism Utilitarianism Other Anarchism Collectivism New Confucianism Conservatism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Modernism Natural Law Nihilism Phenomenology Positivism Neo-Scholasticism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Contemporary 20th–21st century Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Generative linguistics Internalism and Externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Normative ethics Meta-ethics Moral realism Neo-Aristotelian Quinean naturalism Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School New Historicism Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism Phenomenology Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Other Kyoto School Objectivism Russian cosmism more... Positions Aesthetics Formalism Institutionalism Aesthetic response Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Monism Naturalism Epistemology Constructivism Empiricism Idealism Particularism Fideism Rationalism / Reasonism Skepticism Solipsism Mind Behaviorism Emergentism Eliminativism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism Philosophy by region Philosophy-related lists Miscellaneous By region African Ethiopian Aztec Native America Eastern Chinese Egyptian Czech Indian Indonesian Iranian Japanese Korean Vietnam Pakistani Western American British Danish French German Greek Italian Polish Romanian Russian Slovene Turkish Lists Outline Index Years Problems Schools Glossary Philosophers Movements Publications Miscellaneous Women in philosophy Sage (philosophy) Portal Category WikiProject Changes
