Heraldry, honors, and vexillology

/wiki/Flag_of_Armenia
Flag of Armenia
See also: List of Armenian flags Armenia Name Armenian : Եռագույն (Yeřaguyn) Use National flag Proportion 1:2 Adopted 24 August 1990 Design A horizontal tricolour of red , blue , and orange Designed by Stepan Malkhasyants The national flag of Armenia , the Armenian Tricolour ( Armenian : Եռագույն, Yeřaguyn ), consists of three horizontal bands of equal width, red on the top, blue in the middle, and orange (also described as "colour of apricot") on the bottom. The Armenian Supreme Soviet adopted the current flag on 24 August 1990. On 15 June 2006, the Law on the National Flag of Armenia , governing its usage, was passed by the National Assembly of Armenia . Throughout history, there have been many variations of the Armenian flag. In ancient times, Armenian dynasties were represented by different symbolic animals displayed on their flags. [ 1 ] In the twentieth century, various Soviet flags represented the Armenian SSR . The meanings of the colors are interpreted in many different ways. For example, red stands for the blood of the 1.5 million Armenians killed in the Armenian Genocide , blue is for the Armenian pure sky, and orange, represents the country's courage. [ 2 ] The official definition of the colors, as stated in the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, is: The red emblematizes the Armenian Highland , the Armenian people 's continued struggle for survival, maintenance of the Christian faith , Armenia's independence and freedom. The blue emblematizes the will of the people of Armenia to live beneath peaceful skies. The orange emblematizes the creative talent and hard-working nature of the people of Armenia. [ 3 ] Contents 1 Design 2 History 2.1 19th century 2.2 Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic 2.3 First Republic of Armenia 2.4 Early Soviet Armenia and the Transcaucasian SFSR 2.5 Armenian SSR 3 Usage 3.1 National flag days 4 Influence 4.1 Flag of Nagorno-Karabakh 4.2 Flag of the Pan-Armenian Games 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Design [ edit ] In 2012, the Armenian National Institute of Standards (SARM) issued specifications about the construction and colors on the national flag.: [ 4 ] Scheme Red Blue Gold Pantone 485 286 1235 CMYK 0-100-100-0 100-80-0-0 0-35-100-0 RGB 217-0-18 0-51-160 242-168-0 RGB hex triplet D90012 0033A0 F2A800 History [ edit ] Further information: List of Armenian flags Alishan's 1885 design. Flag Ratio: 1:2 Artaxiad Dynasty 189 BC - 1 AD French-Armenian Lusignan Dynasty , 14th century. Today's tricolor flag bears little resemblance to the earliest Armenian 'flags'. In ancient times, armies went into battle behind carvings mounted on poles. The carvings might represent a dragon, an eagle, a lion or "some mysterious object of the gods". [ 1 ] With the advent of Christianity, the Armenian empire adopted many different flags representing various dynasties. The Artaxiad Dynasty 's flag, for instance, consisted of a red cloth displaying two eagles gazing at each other, separated by a flower. 19th century [ edit ] Alishan's flag, designed at the end of the 19th century. Flag of the Armenian Diaspora . After Armenia was split between the Persian and the Ottoman Empires , the idea of an Armenian flag ceased to exist for some time. The Armenian Catholic priest Father Ghevont Alishan created a new flag for Armenia in 1885, after the Armenian Students Association of Paris requested one for the funeral of the French writer Victor Hugo . Alishan's first design was very similar to today's Armenian flag: a horizontal tricolor. However, it looked more like an upside-down variation of the current flag of Bulgaria . The top band was red, symbolizing the first Sunday of Easter (called "Red" Sunday), followed by a green band to represent the "Green" Sunday of Easter, and finally an arbitrary color, white, was chosen to complete the combination. [ 1 ] While in France , Alishan also designed a second flag, identified today as the "Nationalist Armenian Flag". It too was a tricolor, but unlike the previous design, this one was a vertical tricolor similar to the French flag . Its colors were red, green, and blue, from left to right, representing the rainbow that Noah saw after landing on Mount Ararat . [ 1 ] Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic [ edit ] Flag of the Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic (1918). Flag Ratio: 1:2 In 1828, Persian Armenia was annexed to the Russian Empire after the last Russo-Persian War , and became known as Russian Armenia . When the Russian Empire collapsed, Russian Armenia declared its independence and joined the short-lived Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic , together with Georgia and Azerbaijan . This unified state hardly lasted a year and was soon dissolved. Since the Republic was short-lived, it did not use any flags or symbols. Nevertheless, some historians consider a horizontal gold, black, and red tricolor, similar to that of the German flag but arranged differently, to have been the flag of Transcaucasia. [ 5 ] The federation was dissolved on May 26, 1918, when Georgia declared its independence as the Democratic Republic of Georgia . Both Armenia and Azerbaijan declared their independence two days later, on May 28, 1918, as the First Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic , respectively. First Republic of Armenia [ edit ] Flag of the First Republic of Armenia 1918–1922. Flag Ratio: 2:3 Flag of the Transcaucasian SFSR 1922–1936. After gaining independence, the First Republic of Armenia adopted the modern Armenian tricolor. Upon Stepan Malkhasyants 's appearance in the Armenian National Council, [ 6 ] the independent Armenian government selected the colors used during the last period of Rubenid Dynasty : red, blue and yellow. An earlier prototype, which was eventually rejected, was the rainbow flag. This prototype can be seen at the Martiros Saryan House Museum in Yerevan, Armenia. They chose to replace the yellow with orange "because it merged better with the other two colors, presenting a more pleasing composition". [ 1 ] The flag of independent Armenia then had a ratio of 2:3, but on August 24, 1990, when the Armenian Supreme Soviet adopted it as the flag of the Republic of Armenia, the ratio was changed to 1:2. [ 7 ] Early Soviet Armenia and the Transcaucasian SFSR [ edit ] Main article: Flag of the Transcaucasian SFSR On November 29, 1920 Bolsheviks established the Armenian SSR . A new flag was introduced and fixed in the Constitution, accepted on February 2, 1922 by the First Congress of Soviets of the Armenian SSR. [ 8 ] That flag existed only for a month, because on March 12 the Armenian SSR united with the Georgian SSR and the Azerbaijan SSR under the Transcaucasian SFSR (TSFSR). On December 30, 1922 the Transcaucasian SFSR became one of the four Soviet republics that united to form the USSR . The flag of the republic had a hammer and sickle inserted into a star with initials "ЗСФСР" (ZSFSR) written in Russian sans-serif script. These letters stand for Закавказская Советская Федеративная Социалистическая Республика ( Zakavkazskaya Sovetskaya Federativnaya Socialisticheskaya Respublika , "Transcaucasian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic"). [ 8 ] In 1936, the TSFSR was broken up into its three constituent regions, which were named the Georgian SSR, the Armenian SSR, and the Azerbaijan SSR. Armenian SSR [ edit ] Main article: Flag of the Armenian SSR Flag of Soviet Armenia 1952–1990. Flag Ratio: 1:2 As a republic of the USSR , the Armenian SSR introduced its first flag in 1936. Very similar to the flag of the Soviet Union , it was red and featured a yellow hammer and sickle in the corner. Underneath that, there were "H-Kh-S-H" initials written in Armenian serif script. These initials, in the Western Armenian language , stand for Haygagan Khorhurtayin Sodzialistakan Hanrabedutyun , or the "Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic". In the 1940s, the flag was altered to use the Eastern Armenian language spoken in the Republic. The initials were changed to "H-S-S-R" meaning "Hayastani Sovetakan Sotsialistikakan Respublika" in the Eastern Armenian pronunciation. In 1952, a new flag was introduced. The initials were removed completely and in their place a horizontal blue stripe was added. In late May 1988, amid rising nationalist tensions, Armenia's new Communist party leader allowed the banned tricolour of the DRA to fly in Yerevan for the first time in over sixty years. [ 9 ] A year later, following a Nagorno-Karabakh -themed mass demonstration where the tricolour was flown, he urged its official recognition. [ 10 ] This came on August 24, 1990, a day after the Armenian Supreme Soviet declared the republic's sovereignty and renamed the country the Republic of Armenia. At that point, just over a year before Armenia declared its formal independence from the USSR, the tricolour replaced the 1952 flag. Usage [ edit ] The flag waving at the Armenian Embassy in Washington, D.C. The Armenian flag forms the basis of the livery of Armavia , seen here on one of the airline's Sukhoi Superjets . The 2006 law on the National Flag of Armenia states that the flag has to be raised on the following public buildings: Residence of the President Parliament Government Constitutional Court Office of Public Prosecutor Central Bank of Armenia Other governmental buildings The law requires the lowering of the flag to the midpoint of the flagpole on the days of mourning or during mourning ceremonies. A black ribbon needs to be placed at the top of the flag; the length of the ribbon should be equal to the length of the flag. The flying flag has to be raised in its entirety, clean, and unfaded; moreover, the lower part of the flag should be at least 2.5 m off the ground. [ 11 ] National flag days [ edit ] The day of the National Flag of Armenia is marked on 15 June every year. The day is chosen for the reason that the Armenian law on the National Flag of Armenia was passed on 15 June 2006. [ 12 ] The day of the Armenian tricolour was celebrated for the first time on 15 June 2010 in Yerevan . [ 13 ] The daily display of the Armenian flag is encouraged, but legally required only on the following days: [ 14 ] [ 15 ] January 1, January 2 – New Year January 6 – Christmas March 8 – International Women's Day April 7 – Motherhood and Beauty Day May 1 – International Worker's Solidarity Day May 9 – Victory and Peace Day May 28 – First Armenian Republic Day, 1918 July 5 – Constitution Day, 1995 September 21 – Independence Day, 1991 December 7 – Spitak Earthquake Memorial Day , 1988 Influence [ edit ] The national flag is also mentioned in the song " Mer Hayrenik " (Our Fatherland), the national anthem of Armenia. Specifically, the second and third stanzas sing about the creation of the national flag: Here is, brother, for you a flag, That I made with my hands. Nights I didn't sleep, With tears I washed it. (repeat previous two lines) Look at it, the three colors Which are our gifted symbol. Let it be bright against the enemy. Let Armenia always be glorious. (repeat previous two lines) [ 16 ] Flag of Nagorno-Karabakh [ edit ] Nagorno-Karabakh Republic Use National flag Proportion 1:2 Adopted June 2, 1992 Design A horizontal tricolor of red , blue , and orange with a white sideways zig-zag chevron in the fly Main article: Flag of the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic See also: Coat of arms of Nagorno-Karabakh On June 2, 1992, the self-proclaimed Republic of Nagorno-Karabakh , a de facto independent republic in South Caucasus claimed by Azerbaijan , adopted a flag derived from the flag of Armenia, with only a white pattern added. A white, five-toothed, stepped carpet pattern was added to the flag, beginning at the two verges of the cloth's right side and connecting at a point equal to one-third of the distance from that side. [ 17 ] The white pattern symbolizes the current separation of Artsakh (Nagorno-Karabakh) from Armenia proper and its aspiration for eventual union with "the Fatherland". [ 18 ] This symbolises the Armenian heritage, culture and population of the area and represents Nagorno-Karabakh as being a separated region of Armenia by the triangular shape and the zigzag cutting through the flag. The pattern is also similar to the designs used on rugs. The ratio of the flag's breadth to its length is 1:2, same as the Armenian Tricolor. [ 17 ] Flag of the Pan-Armenian Games [ edit ] In addition to the flag of Nagorno-Karabakh, the Armenian flag colors influenced the design of the Pan-Armenian Games flag. In the center of the light blue flag are six interlocking rings, derived from the Olympic rings . The sixth, orange-colored ring, interlocks with the blue and red rings, which symbolize Armenia. Above the rings is a flame in the colors of the Armenian flag. [ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Armenia portal Coat of arms of Armenia References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e "The Evolution of the Armenian Flag" . Armenianheritage.com . Retrieved 2007-01-05 . ^ "Armenia" . Vexilla Mundi . Retrieved 2007-01-06 . ^ "General Information: section the Flag" . Government of Republic of Armenia . Retrieved 2010-10-21 . ^ "HST 50-2012 - General Specifications of the Republic of Armenia flag (AM)" (PDF) . Retrieved 2011-12-18 . ^ "Закавказская Федерация (Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic)" (in Russian). Russian Centre of Vexillology and Heraldry. 2003-05-30 . Retrieved 2006-12-27 . ^ "Республика Армения (Republic of Armenia)" (in Russian). Russian Centre of Vexillology and Heraldry. 2003-03-28 . Retrieved 2006-01-09 . ^ "Armenia: First Republic (1918–1921)" . Flags of the World . Retrieved 2007-01-09 . ^ a b "Cоветская Армения (Soviet Armenia)" (in Russian). Russian Centre of Vexillology and Heraldry. 2004-11-14 . Retrieved 2007-01-20 . ^ De Waal, Thomas. Black Garden: Armenia and Azerbaijan Through Peace and War , pp. 60–1. NYU Press, 2003, ISBN 0-8147-1945-7 . ^ King, Sarah Sanderson and Cushman, Donald P. Political Communication: Engineering Visions of Order in the Socialist World , p. 102. SUNY Press, 1992, ISBN 0-7914-1201-6 . ^ "The Law of the Republic of Armenia about the national flag" (in Armenian). Armenian Legal Information System . Retrieved 2008-03-28 . ^ "Demotix news: State Flag Day celebrations in Armenia" . Retrieved 2010-06-15 . ^ "Yerevan Report: Armenian Flag Day Marked on June 15" . Retrieved 2010-06-16 . ^ "Flag Days Of The World" . Flags of the World . Retrieved 2006-12-29 . ^ "About Armenia" . Permanent Mission of Armenia to the United Nations . Retrieved 2006-12-29 . ^ "Lyrics of Mer Hayrenik" . National Anthems.net . Retrieved 2007-01-10 . ^ a b "Attributes of Statehood" . Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Nagorno-Karabakh. Archived from the original on December 16, 2006 . Retrieved 2007-01-09 . ^ "Flag of Artsakh / Nagorno-Karabakh" . Flags of the World . Retrieved 2007-01-09 . ^ "Armenia: Sport flags" . Flags of the World . Retrieved 2007-01-09 . External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Flags of Armenia . Armenia at Flags of the World (Russian) Flags of Armenia Armenica.org - Symbolic values and information about the Armenian flag and coat of arms Yeraguyn.com - The Flag of the Republic of Armenia (in English, Armenian and Russian) v t e Armenia articles History ( timeline ) Early Origins Name Kura–Araxes culture Hayk Hayasa-Azzi Mitanni Nairi Kingdom of Urartu Median kingdom Orontid dynasty Achaemenid Empire Satrapy of Armenia Kingdom of Armenia Roman Armenia Parthian Empire Byzantine Armenia Persian Armenia Marzpanate Armenia Middle Emirate of Armenia Sajids Bagratuni Armenia Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia Sallarids Ilkhanate Chobanids Ag Qoyunlu Kara Koyunlu Ottoman Armenia 1508–1828 Persian Armenia Safavid Iran Afsharid Iran Qajar Iran Erivan Khanate Karabakh Khanate Treaty of Turkmenchay Russian Armenia Modern First Republic of Armenia Soviet Armenia Independent Armenia By topic Armenian Genocide Nagorno-Karabakh conflict Armenian national liberation movement more... Geography Ararat plain Armenian Highlands Earthquakes Extreme points Lake Sevan Mountains Mount Aragats Rivers and lakes Shikahogh State Reserve more... Subdivisions Historical regions Provinces ( Marzer ) Municipalities more... Politics Constitution Corruption Elections Foreign relations European Union Human rights National Assembly National Security Service Police Political parties President Prime Minister more on government on politics Military Army Air Force Border Guard Defence Minister more... Economy Agriculture Armex (stock exchange) Central Bank Companies Dram (currency) Energy International rankings Mining Pension reform Telecommunications Transport Waste management Culture Alphabet Architecture Art Cinema Cuisine Dance Language Eastern Western Literature Music Sport Theatre more... Demographics Census Crime Education Ethnic minorities Health LGBT history People diaspora Social issues Women more... Religion Armenian Apostolic Church Armenian Catholic Church Armenian Evangelical Church Armenian Brotherhood Church Judaism Islam more... Symbols Armenian Cross Armenian eternity sign Coat of arms Flag Mount Ararat National anthem Apricot Grape Pomegranate Outline Index Book Category Portal WikiProject v t e Flags of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Vatican City States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Nagorno-Karabakh Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other territories Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Jersey Isle of Man Svalbard Other entities European Union Sovereign Military Order of Malta v t e Flags of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus East Timor (Timor-Leste) Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Nagorno-Karabakh Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau v t e National flags and coats of arms National flags Sovereign states Dependent territories Timeline National coats of arms Sovereign states Dependent territories
