Media

/wiki/The_Whistleblower
The Whistleblower
This article is about the 2010 film.  For the 1986 film starring Michael Caine, see The Whistle Blower . The Whistleblower Promotional poster Directed by Larysa Kondracki Produced by Christina Piovesan Amy Kaufman Celine Rattray Benito Mueller Wolfgang Mueller Written by Larysa Kondracki Eilis Kirwan Starring Rachel Weisz David Strathairn Nikolaj Lie Kaas Anna Anissimova Monica Bellucci Vanessa Redgrave Music by Mychael Danna [ 1 ] Cinematography Kieran McGuigan [ 1 ] Edited by Julian Clarke [ 2 ] Production company Voltage Pictures Distributed by Samuel Goldwyn Films Release dates September 13, 2010 ( 2010-09-13 ) ( TIFF ) August 12, 2011 ( 2011-08-12 ) (Canada) October 27, 2011 ( 2011-10-27 ) (Germany) Running time 112 minutes Country Canada Germany United States [ 3 ] Language English Box office $1.1 million [ 4 ] The Whistleblower is a 2010 thriller film directed by Larysa Kondracki and starring Rachel Weisz . Kondracki and Eilis Kirwan wrote the screenplay, which was inspired by the story of Kathryn Bolkovac , a Nebraska police officer who was recruited as a United Nations peacekeeper for DynCorp International in post-war Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1999. While there, she discovered a sex trafficking ring serving (and facilitated by) DynCorp employees, with the UN's SFOR peacekeeping force turning a blind eye. Bolkovac was fired and forced out of the country after attempting to shut down the ring. She took the story to BBC News in England and won a wrongful-dismissal lawsuit against DynCorp. Kondracki wanted her debut film to concern human trafficking, and she encountered Bolkovac's story in college. She and Kirwan struggled to obtain financial support for the project. Eight years after Kondracki decided to produce the film, she secured funding and cast Weisz in the lead role. The Whistleblower —a co-production of Canada, Germany, and the United States—was filmed in Romania from October to December 2009. The Whistleblower premiered on September 13, 2010, at the Toronto International Film Festival , and Samuel Goldwyn Films distributed the film in theaters in the United States. The film was advertised as a fictionalization of events occurring during the late 1990s. Kondracki said that the facts are broadly accurate but some details were omitted for the film; for example, a three-week "breaking-in" period for trafficking victims was not shown. The film received mixed reviews. The performances by Weisz and her co-stars were praised, but the intense violence depicted in several scenes was debated by critics, with some calling it exploitative. Kondracki and Weisz responded that what happened in Bosnia had been toned down for the film. The Whistleblower received several awards and nominations, including three nominations at the 2012 Genie Awards . UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon hosted a screening of the film and promised action would be taken to prevent further instances of human trafficking. The Guardian reported that other UN officials attempted to downplay the events depicted and that initiatives against trafficking in Bosnia were aborted. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production 3.1 Writing 3.2 Filming 4 Themes 5 Release 5.1 Box office 5.2 Critical response 5.3 Home media 5.4 Accolades 6 Aftermath 7 References 8 External links Plot [ edit ] Kathryn Bolkovac is a police officer from Lincoln, Nebraska , who accepts an offer to work with the United Nations International Police in post-war Bosnia-Herzegovina for a UK company, Democra Security (a pseudonym for DynCorp International ). [ 5 ] After successfully advocating for a Muslim woman who experienced domestic abuse, Kathryn is appointed head of the department of gender affairs. Raya, a young Ukrainian woman, and her friend Luba are sold to a Bosnian sex-trafficking ring by a relative. Raya escapes with Irka, another girl forced into prostitution, and they are sent to a women's shelter for victims of human trafficking . While investigating their case, Kathryn uncovers a large-scale sexual slavery ring utilized by international personnel (including Americans). She persuades Raya and Irka to testify against their traffickers in court, guaranteeing their safety; however, an indifferent UN official drops Irka at the border between Bosnia and Serbia when she cannot produce a passport. A corrupt peacekeeper tips off the traffickers, and Raya is recaptured and tortured. Although Kathryn rescues Irka from the woods, the latter is too afraid to proceed with the trial. When she brings the scandal to the attention of the UN, Kathryn discovers that it has been covered up to protect lucrative defense and security contracts. However, she finds allies in her investigation: Madeleine Rees , head of the Human Rights Commission, and internal-affairs specialist Peter Ward. When Raya is found dead, Kathryn sends an email to fifty senior mission personnel detailing her findings; she is then fired from her job. She and Ward acquire evidence of an official admitting the scandal before she is forced to leave the country, and she brings it to the BBC News . The final credits note that after Kathryn's departure, a number of peacekeepers were sent home (although none faced criminal charges because of immunity laws), and the U.S. continues doing business with private contractors such as Democra Security (including billion-dollar contracts in Iraq and Afghanistan). Cast [ edit ] Rachel Weisz as Kathryn Bolkovac David Strathairn as Peter Ward Nikolaj Lie Kaas as Jan Anna Anissimova as Zoe Monica Bellucci as Laura Leviani Vanessa Redgrave as Madeleine Rees Benedict Cumberbatch as Nick Kaufman Roxana Condurache as Raya Kochan Paula Schramm as Luba Rayisa Kondracki as Irka Liam Cunningham as Bill Haynes Demetri Goritsas as Kyle David Hewlett as Fred Murray William Hope as John Blakely Stuart Graham as McVeigh Alexandru Potocean as Viko Production [ edit ] Writing [ edit ] There were so many people in the same situation as her. They saw what was going on, and they didn't respond in the way that she did. — Rachel Weisz on Kathryn Bolkovac [ 6 ] The Whistleblower is based on the experiences of Kathryn Bolkovac , an American police officer who in 1999 was assigned to serve as a peacekeeper with the United Nations in post-war Bosnia. While there, she reportedly discovered a sex-trafficking ring which served and was facilitated by other peacekeepers. Bolkovac was fired after trying to investigate the ring, but she later won a wrongful-dismissal lawsuit. [ 6 ] Larysa Kondracki decided to make The Whistleblower after hearing Bolkovac's account of sex trafficking in Bosnia-Herzegovina . Director Larysa Kondracki and co-screenwriter Eilis Kirwan learned of Bolkovac's story while attending Columbia University , eight years before the film's production. Kondracki subsequently devoted significant time to research human trafficking and the sex trade. After Bolkovac sold her the film rights for $100, [ 7 ] she resolved to adapt the story for the screen. [ 6 ] Financing for the project was initially difficult to secure, although the situation improved after Rachel Weisz was cast as Bolkovac. "I was young and naïve," Kondracki said of her initial attempts to secure funding. "I thought: 'Of course they're going to make my film. It's brilliant!'" [ 6 ] The Whistleblower was described as a "fictionalized dramatic presentation" of a late-1990s scandal. The producers based it on Bolkovac's experiences, rather than on her memoir. [ 5 ] Vanessa Redgrave played Madeleine Rees , a UN human-rights official ("one of the film's few heroic characters") who helps Bolkovac uncover the sex trade. Raya ( Roxana Condurache ) and Luba (Paula Schramm), two Ukrainian young women who are trafficked into Bosnia, are the primary representations of the trafficking victims encountered by Bolkovac. Neither is based on a particular person; they are composites of young women forced to work in Bosnian brothels. Kondracki's younger sister, Rayisa, also played a trafficking victim. [ 8 ] For legal reasons the pseudonym "Democra Security" was used for DynCorp International , the organization whose employees reportedly sexually enslaved the women. [ 5 ] Although the producers kept the film factual, they debated how much to include. Details on the bureaucracy were removed. Kondracki said, "It was too much information and, frankly, people were bored." [ 6 ] Another concern was how much violence against the sex-trafficking victims should be depicted in the film. Kondracki chose to bluntly portray the inhumane treatment of the young women, which she described as accurate representations of what happened. [ 5 ] This included a graphic scene, in which Raya is raped with a lead pipe after her escape and recapture. Weisz thought the reality had been toned down, "In real life there were girls doing this as young as 8 years old." [ 6 ] Kondracki agreed, saying that she had lightened the events depicted out of fear that viewers would "tune it out": [ 5 ] Madeleine Rees (pictured) and Kathryn Bolkovac testified that DynCorp (Democra Security in the film) employees had participated in the sex trafficking of women in Bosnia. We show what is just about permissible to show. We couldn't possibly include the three-week desensitisation period, when they burn the girls in particular places. We couldn't really capture the hopelessness of life these women are subjected to. [ 9 ] Kondracki said that her goal for The Whistleblower was "information and exposure" on human trafficking. She said, "No one is putting pressure on governments to stop it, and there is no accountability. It's laziness." [ 6 ] Filming [ edit ] The Whistleblower is a Canadian–German co-production . [ 8 ] Weisz received the script from producer Amy Kaufman in 2007. Since she was pregnant with her son at the time, [ 10 ] she initially turned down the offer. She said the story haunted her, [ 11 ] and she later contacted Kaufman to ask if the project was still available. [ 11 ] She signed on in August 2009, [ 12 ] and shooting began in October 2009. [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Bolkovac visited the set in Bucharest , Romania , where most of the movie was filmed. [ 11 ] Weisz said that she made a point to spend "every waking moment" with her to accurately portray her. [ 10 ] Weisz and Bolkovac are dissimilar in appearance: the former is dark-haired and slight, and the latter is "blond and much more voluptuous" and "much taller". As a result, the actress focused on emulating Bolkovac's accent and determination. [ 10 ] Bolkovac later said she commended the choice to portray her and appreciated Weisz's efforts to be accurate. [ 15 ] The Carpathian Mountains in Romania were used to depict much of the Bosnian landscape. Filming took around six weeks, relatively short for a thriller; Weisz said most take about three months to complete. [ 16 ] Producers used hand-held cameras [ 17 ] and had a lower budget than usual for the genre. [ 16 ] Kondracki said filming in Eastern Europe was crucial, "In a story such as this, it's more about what you don't see, so you need to create that world." [ 14 ] The Carpathian Mountains in Romania served as the backdrop for the war-ravaged Sarajevo of the late 1990s. [ 14 ] Scenes set in UN buildings were filmed in Toronto . [ 18 ] Most outdoor scenes are set at night; daytime shots often appear bleak, gray and overcast. This, coupled with a grainy texture, helped create a documentary feel. [ 19 ] She was so interested in who I was as a person. Not, obviously, to look like me or to behave like me, but to make sure that my character came out and to make sure that she was saying and doing things perhaps the way that I would've wanted them done. And I know that there had to be a lot of liberties taken to make the movie. But I think in general she does do a great job of bringing my character to the film. — Kathryn Bolkovac on Weisz's portrayal [ 20 ] Weisz had to separate herself emotionally from the atrocities depicted in the film. "It's something you learn," she said. "It's true between 'action' and 'cut,' and after 'cut' it's just not true anymore." [ 21 ] Bolkovac echoed Weisz's sentiments, adding that distancing oneself emotionally is a necessity when working on a police force. [ 21 ] However, the producers wanted the audience to be affected by scenes depicting brutal treatment of the women forced into prostitution, and the character of Raya was created to give a human face to the victims. [ 22 ] Much of the rape scene was cut after its brutality caused a viewer to faint during the film's first screening in Toronto. [ 21 ] Weisz responded: I completely understand. It would be just too harrowing for people to watch. What actually happened was so much worse. I mean the stories I could tell you from the first person who encountered these young women. That was the "light" version if you can believe that. But it isn't a documentary, you don't want to destroy people. You just want to illuminate something that actually happened that was a hundred times worse. [ 23 ] Themes [ edit ] Victor Malarek 's book The Natashas inspired Kondracki to produce a film on sex trafficking The Whistleblower focuses on sexual slavery, human trafficking, and corruption. [ 24 ] Kondracki wanted her first project to concern sex trafficking but was unsure how to create a moving, original plot. Her mother was born in Ukraine, and she was aware of what she described as the country's "epidemic" of trafficking. [ 7 ] Victor Malarek 's book The Natashas inspired her to produce a film on the subject. [ 7 ] She said of her initiative being a challenge, "No one wants to watch a film of an enslaved girl being raped for two hours." [ 9 ] Bolkovac's experiences gave Kondracki a framework for the film and added the themes of corruption and wide-scale cover-ups. [ 7 ] Film critic Rex Reed said that the abuse of power featured prominently in The Whistleblower ; a number of government officials participate in the sex trade or turn a blind eye to it [ 24 ] (including peacekeepers, UN members and mercenaries ). [ 7 ] Wallace Baine of the Santa Cruz Sentinel wrote that these aspects' portrayal made the movie "slippery and true-to-life". She said, "There are clear and vivid monsters in this film, but there are also those existing in the shades-of-gray middle, nice-enough guys tolerating crimes of unspeakable barbarity." [ 19 ] Justice, another prominent theme, does not materialize by the end. [ 8 ] The sex trafficking victim Raya is killed, and none of the peacekeepers who participated in the trafficking are prosecuted (although several are sent home). According to Baine, viewers are left with the impression that "the worst violence in Bolkovac's story was the violence done to justice". [ 19 ] Bolkovac is portrayed as imperfect—a "noble but screwed up" individual. [ 24 ] In the film (which roughly mirrors her real life), her personal life is in disarray. She has lost custody of her children to her ex-husband and goes to Bosnia to earn money to move closer to them. While there, she has an affair with a fellow peacekeeper. [ 19 ] Kondracki wanted to promote the idea of an average protagonist who acted against injustice while her peers looked the other way. [ 7 ] Her flaws are offset by her determination to fight the sex trade, and reviewers found these aspects instrumental in making her a three-dimensional character. [ 19 ] [ 24 ] Weisz compared Bolkovac's story of "one lone woman fighting injustice" to that of David and Goliath , her favorite film genre. [ 11 ] In the film, as in real life, Bolkovac begins by investigating a case of a kidnapped girl. As the story unfolds, she discovers a wide-ranging web of corruption and faces growing obstacles. The sex trade is facilitated by a large, influential organization. [ 16 ] When she tries to report her findings to the UN and local officials, she receives threats and is "shunned by coworkers and thwarted by higher-ups". Weisz explained that she liked the idea of an ordinary person doing something extraordinary. She said, "I love that kind of thriller, the ordinary person who, because of their character, it's their character that leads them." [ 11 ] Release [ edit ] Rachel Weisz at the film's 2010 Toronto Film Festival premiere The Whistleblower premiered on September 13, 2010, at the 2010 Toronto Film Festival . [ 25 ] Screenings were also held at film festivals in North America, [ 26 ] including the 2011 Human Rights Watch Film Festival in New York. [ 6 ] A screening was held for The Whistleblower in Bosnia-Herzegovina for the first time in March 2014. The film was shown in Sarajevo and Mostar , with Kathryn Bolkovac being invited to speak to the Bosnian audience. [ 27 ] Box office [ edit ] Samuel Goldwyn Films purchased rights to distribute the film in the United States. [ 28 ] The film had a limited release starting on August 5, 2011. It initially screened in seven theaters and expanded to a maximum of 70 theaters before drawing down. Its theatrical run lasted 12 weeks, during which it grossed $1.1 million . [ 4 ] Critical response [ edit ] At the time of its theatrical release, The Whistleblower received mixed reviews. [ 29 ] Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes said critics commended Weisz's performance but thought that "the film suffers from a literal-minded approach to the material". The website surveyed 115 critics and, categorizing the reviews as positive or negative, assessed 85 as positive and 30 as negative. Of the 115 reviews, it determined a rating average of 6.5 out of 10. Based on the reviews, the website gave the film a score of 74%. [ 30 ] Another aggregator Metacritic surveyed 30 critics and assessed 17 reviews as positive, 10 as mixed, and three as negative. Based on the reviews, it gave the film a score of 59 out of 100, which it said indicated "mixed or average reviews". [ 31 ] The Guardian's Ed Vulliamy called The Whistleblower "the most searing drama-documentary of recent years", [ 9 ] and The Huffington Post ' s Marshall Fine said the story was "dark, grim, and harrowing". [ 32 ] Doris Toumarkine of Film Journal International called the movie a "well-told but troubling story impressively wrapped for audiences who show up in theatres for do-good cinema of a high order". [ 18 ] Leigh Paatsch of News.com.au said, "it is Bolkovac's ferocious will to right so many wrongs (expertly channelled by Weisz) that keeps you glued to the screen". [ 33 ] Stephenie Foster of The Huffington Post gave the film a highly-favorable review: It's a compelling and maddening story, and reflects the complexity of how international institutions function and interact and the difficulty of accountability in a situation where people have immunity for their actions. But, it's also a story of gutsy people in tough and compromising situations making decisions that aren't in their personal best interest. [ 34 ] An equally-positive review appeared in The Balkan Chronicle : Kondracki shows great promise with her direction. Pacing is tight for the most part, and the film feels well polished...The film is unsatisfying only in its conclusion. This is not the fault of the filmmakers who choose to stay true to Bolkovac's story. No one was ever brought to justice. A few of men were fired and sent home, but everyone had diplomatic immunity so no one ever faced criminal charges. Two million people worldwide are still being trafficked. [ 35 ] Allison Willmore of The A.V. Club gave The Whistleblower a negative review, criticizing the producers for making its antagonists one-dimensional: "There's no hint of the erosion of morality that led to this point." [ 36 ] Peter Rainer of The Christian Science Monitor called the film's pace "frustratingly uneven", but commended the actors' performances: Condurache "makes Raya's fears tremblingly palpable". [ 37 ] Stephen Holden of The New York Times wrote that the film "tells a story so repellent that it is almost beyond belief. Its conclusion—that in the moral quagmire of war and its aftermath, human trafficking and corruption are collateral damage—is unutterably depressing." [ 8 ] He praised Weisz's performance as "the strongest element" of the production. [ 8 ] The actors' performances received overall praise from reviewers. Camerin Courtney of Christianity Today was dismayed that the main character engaged in a sexual relationship with a married man, but Weisz "is wonderful as Bolkovac, a no-nonsense civil servant who is stunned at what she walks into" while "Vanessa Redgrave is a needed touch of strength and warmth as her mentor Madeleine, and David Strathairn is at his government thriller best as Peter Ward, an Internal Affairs agent. Raya is heart-breaking as the young victim." [ 38 ] Steve Rea of The Post and Courier praised Redgrave's acting in the supporting role of Madeleine Rees as "forceful, elegant, precise". [ 16 ] Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle said, "Weisz gives a psychologically astute performance as a woman who can't leave things alone." [ 39 ] Rex Reed of The Observer called her "superb" in the lead role. [ 24 ] Kondracki's graphic depiction of violence was controversial. Bob Mondello of NPR called it "sobering", but felt the scenes detracted from the film and should have been more subtle. [ 40 ] Ryan Rojas of Tonight at the Movies described the film as "gritty and merciless", and cautioned that certain scenes might offend some viewers: "While the scenes do work as reinforcing the horror of the events, it really just made it obvious that the way that the director was going to win over fans was to simply shock them into numbness, as scenes showing rape, mutilation, and murder are shown in very disturbing fashion." [ 41 ] Christian Hamaker of Crosswalk.com wrote: The film is almost unremittingly grim, which may seem appropriate for such a horrifying subject, but the effect on the viewer is that of being struck repeatedly with a sledgehammer. Sex trafficking is bad. Really bad! Did you get that, or do you need to watch a few more scenes of physical and sexual brutality? Don't worry: The Whistleblower has those aplenty. It takes brutality into the realm of gratuitousness, all in the name of showing the horrors of the issue it's addressing. [ 42 ] A review in The Balkan Chronicle , an Internet-based newspaper reporting from the Balkans, disagreed with the opinion that the violence was unnecessarily explicit or sensationalized: "Sugarcoating it would do no one any good. Grisly authenticity is one of the film's greatest aspects." [ 43 ] Later, when Bolkovac spoke at a screening of the film in Bosnia, it was reported that her message was well-received and discussion about the events that occurred in the late 1990s "did not fail to engage and provoke". [ 27 ] Home media [ edit ] 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment released the film on DVD on January 15, 2012. [ 9 ] [ 44 ] The movie was reportedly more successful on Blu-ray Disc than in theatres, and film critic Lynette Porter said that the subject's serious nature made it better-suited for television. [ 26 ] Accolades [ edit ] Year Award Category Recipients and nominees Result Ref. 2010 Whistler Film Festival Audience Award – Best Narrative Feature The Whistleblower Won [ 45 ] Phillip Borsos Award – Best Film Won [ 46 ] 2011 Palm Springs International Film Festival Audience Award – Best Narrative Feature Won [ 47 ] Cinema for Peace Awards Cinema for Peace Award – Justice & Human Rights Larysa Kondracki Nominated [ 46 ] Seattle International Film Festival Golden Space Needle Award – Best Director Won [ 48 ] Golden Space Needle Award – Best Film The Whistleblower Nominated [ 45 ] 2012 Genie Awards Best Picture Nominated [ 49 ] Academy of Canadian Cinema and Television Award for Best Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role Rachel Weisz Nominated [ 50 ] Best Supporting Actress Roxana Condurache Nominated [ 49 ] Vancouver Film Critics Circle Vancouver Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress in a Canadian Film Rachel Weisz Nominated [ 51 ] Aftermath [ edit ] In response to controversy caused by the film, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon promised action to prevent sex trafficking by UN workers. Consistent with Bolkovac's account, The Whistleblower portrays DynCorp International employees as participants in the postwar Bosnian sex trade with the UN turning a blind eye. UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon hosted a screening of the film and promised action would be taken to prevent further instances of human trafficking. Bolkovac responded, "Unfortunately, the widespread horror is already there. This is not going to be simple or a quick fix." She said that in addition to Bosnia, peacekeepers had violated human rights in Nigeria, Kosovo, Burundi, Sierra Leone, the Congo, Liberia, Cambodia, Iraq, Afghanistan, Haiti, Colombia, Guinea and Sudan. [ 9 ] [ 14 ] Kondracki added that while she wanted to be optimistic and hoped that the screening would "lead to genuine discussion and thought about the UN's involvement in sex trafficking and other crimes", she worried that it might not have the desired lasting impact: "I know we are going to hear a lot about what has been done since the time depicted in this film, but rhetoric only goes so far. The situation has escalated." Following the theatrical release of The Whistleblower , The Guardian reported that other UN officials attempted to downplay the events depicted and that initiatives against trafficking in Bosnia were aborted. [ 9 ] DynCorp International spokesperson Ashley Burke said: I haven't seen the movie so I can't comment on its content, but I can tell you that, when we contacted the film's distributor to learn more about the movie, we were informed that the film 'is a fictionalized dramatic presentation' that while inspired by Ms. Bolkovac's experiences, is not based on her book. There was no threatened legal action taken to ensure they did not use the company's name in the film. [ 5 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Chang, Justin (September 15, 2010). "Review: ‘The Whistleblower’" . Variety . Retrieved July 14, 2014 . ^ Mackie, John (March 4, 2010). "Vancouver at the Oscars: District 9 film editor makes the cut" . The Vancouver Sun . ^ "The Whistleblower (2011)" . American Film Institute . Retrieved July 8, 2014 . ^ a b "The Whistleblower" . Box Office Mojo . Retrieved October 5, 2013 . ^ a b c d e f Lynch, Colum (June 29, 2011). "The Whistleblower: The movie the U.N. would prefer you didn't see" . Foreign Policy . Retrieved October 3, 2013 . ^ a b c d e f g h Karpel, Ari (July 28, 2011). "Exposing Injustices, the Real-Life Kind" . The New York Times . Retrieved October 3, 2013 . ^ a b c d e f Griffin, Blake (May 11, 2011). "Exclusive Interview With Larysa Kondracki On The Whistleblower" . We Got this Covered . Retrieved October 8, 2013 . ^ a b c d e Holden, Stephen (August 4, 2011). "The Whistleblower (2010)" . The New York Times . Retrieved October 3, 2013 . ^ a b c d e f Vulliamy, Ed (January 14, 2012). "Has the UN learned lessons of Bosnian sex slavery revealed in Rachel Weisz film?" . The Guardian . Retrieved October 4, 2013 . ^ a b c Lacher, Irene (July 31, 2011). "The Sunday Conversation: Rachel Weisz" . Los Angeles Times . Retrieved October 5, 2013 . ^ a b c d e Zakarin, Jordan (October 1, 2011). "Rachel Weisz In 'The Whistleblower': An Ordinary Woman Doing Extraordinary Things" . The Huffington Post . Retrieved October 5, 2013 . ^ Siegel, Tatiana (August 20, 2009). "Trio join Weisz for indie 'Whistleblower ' " . Variety . Retrieved November 29, 2009 . ^ Blaga, Lulia (October 28, 2009). "Whistleblower begins filming at MediaPro Studios" . Film News Europe . Retrieved October 5, 2013 . ^ a b c d Liao, Shannon (August 5, 2011). "Blowing the Whistle on the U.N.'s Big Secret" . The Epoch Times . Retrieved October 6, 2013 . ^ "Q&A with Kathryn Bolkovac, inspiration for the film 'The Whistleblower ' " . Park & Go . Retrieved October 5, 2013 . ^ a b c d Rea, Steve (August 28, 2011). " ' Whistleblower' Rachel Weisz haunted by Bosnian sex-slave story" . The Post and Courier . Retrieved October 12, 2013 . ^ Whitman, Howard (February 17, 2012). "Blu-ray Movie Review: The Whistleblower" . Technologytell . Retrieved April 2, 2012 . ^ a b Toumarkine, Doris (August 1, 2011). "Film Review: The Whistleblower" . Film Journal . Retrieved October 5, 2013 . ^ a b c d e Baine, Wallace (August 18, 2011). " ' Whistleblower' focuses on horrors of sex trafficking" . Santa Cruz Sentinel . Retrieved October 8, 2013 . ^ King, Dennis (January 27, 2012). "Rachel Weisz celebrates heroic woman in fact-based 'The Whistleblower ' " . NewsOK . Retrieved October 6, 2013 . ^ a b c Leong, Melissa (September 17, 2010). "Star Rachel Weisz and subject Kathryn Bolkovac on detaching themselves from the events of The Whistleblower" . The National Post . Retrieved October 6, 2013 . ^ "The Whistleblower (2010/2011)" . Covering Media . Retrieved October 6, 2013 . ^ Hammond, Pete (August 5, 2011). "HAMMOND: Could Rachel Weisz Be Back In The Oscar Game?" . Deadline . Retrieved October 6, 2013 . ^ a b c d e Reed, Rex (August 2, 2011). "The Whistleblower Reveals a Truth More Chilling than Fiction" . The Observer . Retrieved October 8, 2013 . ^ Brevet, Brad (August 24, 2010). "The Complete 2010 Toronto International Film Festival Line-up" . Rope of Silicon . Retrieved May 27, 2011 . ^ a b Porter, Lynette (September 12, 2010). "More than a Movie: 'The Whistleblower's Heartfelt Plea for Greater Humanity" . Pop Matters . Retrieved October 7, 2013 . ^ a b Sivertsen, Kim (March 5, 2014). " " The Whistleblower" shown in Sarajevo and Mostar" . The Nansen Center for Peace and Dialogue . Retrieved June 26, 2014 . ^ Kit, Borys (November 4, 2010). "Rachel Weisz's 'The Whistleblower' Picked Up By Samuel Goldwyn Films" . The Hollywood Reporter . Retrieved May 27, 2011 . ^ Sandell, Scott (August 13, 2011). " ' The Whistleblower': Poster child for the middlebrow?" . Los Angeles Times . Retrieved July 3, 2014 . ^ "The Whistleblower" . Rotten Tomatoes . Retrieved October 6, 2013 . ^ "The Whistleblower" . Metacritic . Retrieved October 6, 2013 . ^ Fine, Marshall (August 5, 2011). "HuffPost Review: The Whistleblower" . The Huffington Post . Retrieved October 8, 2013 . ^ Paatsch, Leigh (September 29, 2011). "Film review: The Whistleblower" . News.com.au . Retrieved October 6, 2013 . ^ Foster, Stephenie (August 2, 2011). "The Whistleblower: A Compelling Film About Standing Up for What's Right" . The Huffington Post . Retrieved October 3, 2013 . ^ "The Whistleblower – A film about the true story from Bosnia" . The Balkan Chronicle . March 20, 2012 . Retrieved October 3, 2013 . ^ Willmore, Allison (August 4, 2011). "The Whistleblower" . A.V. Club . Retrieved October 5, 2013 . ^ Rainer, Peter (August 5, 2011). "The Whistleblower: movie review" . Christian Science Monitor . Retrieved October 3, 2013 . ^ Courtney, Camerin (August 12, 2011). "The Whistleblower" . Christianity Today . Retrieved October 7, 2013 . ^ LaSalle, Mick (August 12, 2011). " ' The Whistleblower' review: truth improves it" . San Francisco Chronicle . Retrieved October 8, 2013 . ^ Mondello, Bob (August 4, 2011). "A 'Whistleblower' Against International Injustice" . NPR . Retrieved October 12, 2013 . ^ Rojas, Ryan (August 4, 2011). "Movie Review: The Whistleblower – A graphically charged drama about real life human trafficking" . Tonight at the Movies . Retrieved October 12, 2013 . ^ Hamaker, Christian (August 5, 2011). " Whistleblower Tackles Human Trafficking" . Crosswalk.com . Retrieved October 12, 2013 . ^ "The Whistleblower—A film about the true story from Bosnia" . The Balkan Chronicle . March 20, 2012 . Retrieved June 26, 2014 . ^ "The Whistleblower" . The-Numbers . Retrieved June 26, 2014 . ^ a b "The Whistleblower, a true tale" . Sunday Times . May 26, 2013 . Retrieved October 6, 2013 . ^ a b "Larysa Kondracki" . Columbia University . Retrieved October 6, 2013 . ^ "22nd Annual Palm Springs International Film Festival Announces Festival Winners" . Palm Springs International Film Society. January 16, 2011 . Retrieved October 6, 2013 . ^ Savage, Sophia (June 29, 2011). "Many Festivals, Many Winners: iW Rounds up June's Major Film Fest Awards" . Indie Wire . Retrieved October 6, 2013 . ^ a b " ' Method,' 'Cafe' lead Genie noms" . Delhi News Record . January 17, 2012 . Retrieved October 12, 2013 . ^ "2012 Genie Awards Nominations: Complete List" . Movie Fone . January 17, 2012 . Retrieved October 6, 2013 . ^ "VFCC Announces 12th Annual Award Nominees" . Vancouver Film Critics. January 2, 2012 . Retrieved October 6, 2013 . External links [ edit ] Official website The Whistleblower at the Internet Movie Database The Whistleblower at Rotten Tomatoes The Whistleblower at Metacritic Kathryn Bolkovac's website
